1999.01.0195: Sophoclis Trachiniae
**********************************************

Editions used:
- Jebb: text, comment, translation
- Campbell: text and comment
- Kamberbbek: comment
- Lloyd-Jones (loeb): text and translation
- Easterling: text and comment
- Davies: text and comment

NOTE: expression used in the notes of the annotation interface:
- change: in this place Jebb's text should be changed

(structure = line number \t\ \lemma (utf-8) \t\ comment)

1	ἐστ᾽	according to Campb it's a copula linking the ὡς-clause to the sbj. But an existential interpretation is preferable: "there is a saying of mortal, revealed of old etc".

1	ἀρχαῖος	most likely adverbially (i.e. predicatively: AtvV) with φανείς; others make ἐστὶ φανείς” as=“πέφανται”; Ll-J's translation is ambiguous: "there is an ancient saying among men, once revealed to them"

1	φανείς	in the explicit of the trimeter like others 'pleonastic' (Jebb, Davis) participles (e.g. λαβών, παρών κτλ: Longo). It's function, if we rule out the periphrastic, is clearly attributive with the sbj.

1	ἀνθρώπων	a numbers of parallels are brought by commentators for this gen. Cf. especially those quoted by Jebb: Pind. O.7. 54“ἀνθρώπων παλαιαὶ ῥήσιες”, id. Pind. N.9. 6“ἔστι δέ τις λόγος ἀνθρώπων”: Soph. Ai.664“ἡ βροτῶν παροιμία. ἀρχαῖος”. The gen is subjecti (Kam) and the expression is equivalent to "the saying of men" (i.e "that which men said"), but the structure is blurred by the peculiar word-order, which clearly point towards a phrase like ἀνθρώποις φανείς  (and by the other blurs of the sentence: see Longo, Jebb for parallels).

2	ὡς	functions as an explanatory/attributive clause, explaining which old saying is discussed (see 1/ἐστ᾽)

2	αἰῶν᾽ 	the obj of the main verb of the clause is doubled, so that the logical sbj of the subordinate clause ("you cannot tell whether the life of a man is good or ill") is anticipated as a first obj, with the governed clause following ("you cannot know the life of man, whether is good or ill"); those structures are annotated as appositive in the treebank.

2	ἐκμάθοις	the 3rd person ἐκμάθοι is attested by a number of recent mss. It is defended by Davis.

4	ἐμόν	Cambp. very sensibly remarks a slight progress in the construction: it starts like the obj of ἔξοιδα and like a constr with ὄντα (Longo) would follow. Then the constr with ἔχειν follows (which has a pathetic force acc. to Cambp). "[B]y its placing τὸν ἐμόν stands in a similar relation to ἔξοιδ' to αἰῶν' with ἐκμαθοῖς.

3	τῳ	goes ἀπὸ κοινῦ with both member of the coordination; as it is typical, it is attached to the second member of the coordination for "economy" (East.: 'when a word which is required in each of 2 clauses is included in one and has to be understood in the other'). the presence of a previous τις for the same undef. person possibly influences the collocation: see Fraenk on Ag. 55-6.

6	μὲν	solitarium or used to "oppose her ancient trouble to her subsequent life, ll. 27 foll" (cambp)? But this opposition is then lost.

7	ἔτ᾽ ἐν	conjectured by Winshemius (so LL-J, other attribute it to Erfurdt) for the unmetrical ἐν of L. Campb adopts the ἐνί of of the roman family (a), but this is certainly wrong for various reasons: 1. ἐνί is unattested in iambic parts of tr (see Fraenk on Ag. 78) 2. it is metrically unsustainable (see Jebb) 3. it looks like a guess by some scribe eager to restore the metre (Davis). ἔτι is judged to be the best amendment, even if not entirely satisfactory.

8	ὄκνον	v.l. ὄτλον from scholia, adopted by some (e.g. Dawe); note that the clause νυμφείων ὄκνον ἄλγιστον ("I suffered painful affliction in the matter of my wedding": Ll-J) is peculiar: 1. ἀλγεινός is unattested with words meaning "fear" (Longo): 'a painful fear' is a very strong and poetical expression indeed (it mingles two of the most prominent themes: fear and wedding; East)  2. νυμφεία mean typically wedding-chambers (as a noun it seems to be Soph's invenction: Longo): here for the fist time (and elsewhere only in Mosc. Eur. 159) it means "wedding".

8	ἄλγιστον	irreg. sup. of ἀλγεινός

8		εἴ	this construction (often with ἀλλός) strengthens the superlative (Kam); more than simply equivalent to paritive ἄλγιστον γυναικῶν Αἰτωλίδων, it defines in which measure the superlative applies to the speaker (ADV).

9	γὰρ	introduces the narrative section in the rhesis, as it often does (Davis)

9	ἦν	Two possible interpretations: 1. dative of possession ("For I had as a wooer a river", Ll-J): μοι = PNOM 2. μνηστὴρ PNOM and μοι as adnominal attributive dative with μνηστήρ ("For my suitor was a river-god"). Since in Soph. purely adnominal possessive dative is not used, we prefer the first interpretation.

9	λέγω	parenthetical precision mark. Longo distinguish two features of these remarks: 1. in 3rd-person sentences it serves mainly to narrow and define with better precision a proper name (e.g. Ai 569) 2. in 2nd-person addresses it draws the attention of the addressee.

11	ἐναργὴς	ambiguous between two constructions: 1. attributive like in the other parallels αἰόλος δράκων ἑλικτός and ἀνδρείῳ κύτει (with variation!) 2. predicative with φοιτῶν: "manifest as a bull" (Ll-J). But Cambp's paraphrasis "in the unmistakable form of a bull" is right and the whole opposition and variations is rather in the series of the predicative: nouns / noun / adj. (ταυρός /  δράκων /  βούπρῳρος )

12	ἄλλοτ᾽	ἄλλοτε omitted in the first coord clause (see Longo for parallels)

13	βούπρῳρος	the whole clause poses a very difficult textual problem. κύτει βούπρῳρος is the text transmitted by the quotation in Strabo (10.458); all mss of Soph. have τύπῳ βούκρανος. The choice is complicated by the fact that both adj's seem to imply that Acheloos had human trunk and bull face, which is the contrary of pictorial or sculptural representations of the River-god (unless it is for the horns of the bull), not the "Minotaur-like monster, with bull's head" (so Isler in LIMC) implied here. The adjs seem to be both "old, poetic and synonymous" (Davis), as it is witnessed by Empedocl. fr. 61.2-3 D-K. Some have thought about author's variants. Yet, as pointed out (Cambp, Longo, Davis), τύπῳ in relation to shape and with adjs like γυναικείῳ or ἀνδρείῳ is much more frequently attested than κύτoς. That certainly makes it a lectio difficilior. Also, East. may be right in stating that βούπρῳρος is visually more effective.

14	κρουνοὶ	there is certainly some redundancy in the phrase κρουνοὶ... κρηναίου ποτοῦ; again, the redundant element comes last in the iambic verse.

14	ποτοῦ	κρηναίου ποτοῦ is a "iunctura Sophoclea" (Longo); it is certainly a very Sophoclean combination of abstract + denominal adj. from a more concrete reference. Neither a gen. of origin, nor "partitivum" (Kam.), but rather epesegeticum, to explain the very abstract ποτόν: "a liquid (consisting) of sping water".

15	προσδεδεγμένη	"intensive" perfect (Moorhouse p. 198-9 and 211), which is more frequent with verb describing emotional states, like πεφόβημαι, τεθάμβηκα, γέγηθα: "in a state of anxious expectation" (Kam); the model of epic ποτιδέγμενος is possibly felt (cf. Longo: "un epicismo sintattico").

17	ἐμπελασθῆναί 	in this meaning (approach one's bed), the simple verb πελάζειν + the dative is more common

18	χρόνῳ	Cambp notes that de phrase χρόνῳ δέ at the beginning of sentences typically means "but in time", and it is used to summarize a long time span and coming to the conclusion of a long process. This is not the case, though, and the following antithesis blurs the structure.

18	μέν	the antithesis is well paraphrased by Jebb: not, indeed, soon enough to prevent the anguish of which she has spoken (v. 16), yet to her joy. It opposes the two syntactically different phrases, "in late time" and "to my joy" (litt. "to me (that was) glad").

20	συμπεσὼν 	the whole phrase is quite redundant: συμπίπτειν already mean "clash in fighting" (Longo); note again the epesegetical (rather pleonastic) genitive ἀγώνα μάχης (ἀγών yet does not seem to be metaphorical, as Davis writes).

21	ἐκλύεται	typically with a gen. of separation; here absolutely (Longo). Note the vivid present in narration and the middle ("delivered me with his own hand"?) rather than "delivered me for himself" (i.e. to make me his bride), Cambp.

22	θακῶν	periphrasis with to be + part. (annotated as copula + pnom). See Gonda: the point is that those periphrasis are still felt as semi-nominal sentences, therefore pnom.

22	ἀταρβὴς	adj. with privative α  governing a compl in gen.

24	ἥμην	the two lines are nowadays retained by all editors; the expunction is perfectly rejected by Jebb, who notes that κάλλος as a cause of grief is a strong link between Iole and Deianeira.

25	ἐξεύροι	typically presupposes a search, not an accident (Longo)

25	ποτέ	sooner or later

26	τέλος	can be intended either as an adverbial acc. or as object of ἔθηκε (schol., Kam); but the latter cannot mean: "to imposed a final settlement", for: 1. the verb still lacks an obj (e.g. τούτοις) 2. the simple cannot stand (Longo). Vice versa, καλῶς θεῖναι seems to be idiomatic (pace Fraenkel ad Ag 913).

27	λέχος	could be interpreted as: 1. either as cognate acc. of ξυστᾶσα (cf. Eur. Sten. 17 for the active sense of λέχος συνιστάναι); thus Cambp, Longo; 2. or nom. i.e. 'chosen bride' (Jebb, Kam, Davis, Ll-J); the meaning and usage of λέχος can support both (East).

27	Ἡρακλεῖ	again suspended between ξυστᾶσα and κριτόν (chosen by Heracles, appointed for)


30	διαδεδεγμένη	ambiguous: it can be absolute ("succeeding") or πόνον could be intended as its object

34	κἀκ	on the order (and the meaning) see Jebb

35	τῳ	not necessarily Euristheus: generic "someone" (now this, now that) is more forcible (Longo)

42	αὐτοῦ	gen objecti with ὠδῖνας ("pains on his account": East). More poignant than adverbial genitive ("he afflicted me with sharp pains here": Ll-J)

49	δέσποινα	the salutation δέσποινα + proper name is only here and in the Ajax for humans; in Aesc. it is reserved for the invocation of the gods

49	πολλὰ	the opening formula πολλὰ μὲν... νῦν δὲ (cf. 52) is very frequent: Davis quotes S. Ph. 1047-8, Thuc. 3.37.1 and bibliography with many more.

50	ὀδύρματα	Davis remembers "S's fondness for combining abstract nouns in -ma with and -mos with rare compound or privative adjectives" and quotes Long p. 92

51	γοωμένην	constr. with double acc: internal-cognate object (ὀδύρματα) + proper object (ἔξοδον), Jebb.

51	Ἡράκλειον	note the adj instead of the gen. subjecti

53	γνώμαισι	could be taken either as an instrumental dat. or as a dat. commodi with δίκαιον ("it is right for the slave minds to instruct the free people"). The meaning of γνῶμαι changes sensibly if we switch from the two interpretations: 1. γν. = advices, counsels 2. γν. = minds. The first meaning is preferable.

53	κἀμὲ	2 construction are discussed by Jebb: 1. coordinate protasis with καί depending on εἰ 2. καί = even and apodosis beginning in l. 53. Jebb finds n.1 'more deferential' and it is followed by Davis. Longo discusses the problem combining it with the question of τὸ σόν; he prospects 4 possible solutions that scale from an extreme of maximum boldness to a most deferential expression. But the hypothetical seem to express sufficiently the deferential caution, and so does "even". "It is right (so Cambp and Kam) for me to indicate you what is your part". The choice may also affect the sentence division (see 53:.)

53	σόν	a problem may rise in dividing the words ΤΟΣΟΝ; either τὸ σόν ('thy part') or τόσον ('just as much') can be acceptable and conceivable as the right obj to φράσαι ('indicate'). Partially, it may be thought a question of tone (so from Jebb to Longo); but τὸ σόν is a very well established way to say "what's fitting for you", "what lays in you". And it seems only natural that, if the Nurse has undertaken the task of instructing Dei., as the protasis declares, she should do so by suggesting what a lady in her position must do. East notes also the 'fine chiasmus: free/slave-me/you'.

53	·	other ways of punctuating the sentence (and thus of dividing the sentences in the Nurse's speech) are possible, depending on the syntax of the if-clause(s) that is adopted. If one takes the κἀμὲ-clause as a second protasis, perhaps a comma (and not a semicolon: thus Jebb and Davis) is preferable (East).


56	εἰ	it is not easy to understand 1. what this εἰ-clause implies 2. to justify the opt. νέμοι. Typically it is understood as a hypoth. clause with an oblique opt attached to εἰκός which implies a εἰκός (ἂν εἴη) in the relative. The Schol's interpretation (that makes εἰ interrogative: ἵνα μάθῃς...) is tempting but difficult on the light of the opt (which follows the past tenses).

58	ἐγγὺς	could go either with the verb or the subj ("here it is near us"); this last is preferable (Longo)

58	δόμους	the acc. is perfectly defended by S. OC 643 (Jebb, East); no need to change it to δόμοις (Wakenfield)

66	φέρειν Valkenaer: φέρει MSS; "pedanteria della più bella", according to Longo, but the correction is accepted by almost all (except Dain and Kam). Davis is right in pointing at the "dramatically significant tendentious rephrasing": Deian. (pace Kam) is quoting the nurse, but she does so speaking with the social/moral words the slave woman could not use.

69	ἄροτον	= "year" after complex semantic passages: corn-filed > tillage > season for plough work > year (this last only in Soph)

71	καὶ	with τοῦτο (so Denniston), rather than with the verb (ἔτλη); in this last case it would have ment "if indeed he endured that" (Jebb), with emphasis on Dein's disbelief of the news (Longo): AuxY rather than AuxZ

76	δῆτ᾽	"in questions most frequently follows an interrogative pron or pronominal adv at the opening of a speech (Denniston 271)"; and again "δῆτα not infrequently follows interr. particles, while retaining its logical force" (271); our solution is then to tag it as AuxZ with the int. It is also quite frequent with οἶσθα in full question ("did you know"...), in which cases is better tagged as AuxY. Longo notes that although ἆρα δῆτα, ἆρ᾽ οἶσθα and οἶσθα δῆτa are all quite frequent, only here and in OT 1014, at one of the peak of dramatic tension, is the combination of all three attested

79	τελεῖν	note the etymological figure τελευτὴν... τελεῖν 

80	ἄρας	suspect: the masc. ἆθλον requires the meaning "contest", "struggle", and for the required meaning "undertake" the mid. would be needed

80	γ᾽	Reiske; τὸν MSS. But the elision of χρόνον is utterly impossible: whenever we have something of the kind, the article is missing, and one may very well ask wether χρόνον has there anything to do with expressions like ἐν ὑστέρῳ at all (Longo). Yet Reiske's particle look like a very feeble remedy.

84	πίπτομεν	the whole line, as it is, cannot stand in the sentence; transposition does not solve any problem. Also, line 84 clearly spoils the contrast between the two legs of the antithesis, whose effects are greatly enhanced by the lack of symmetry: without a second gen. abs. the second part in ominously left unspecified, and the ἅμα is charged with sinister and dramatic connotations (Longo). Therefore, the only solution is expunction. Davis also quotes Wilamowitz's conclusions that many interpolated lines are inserted in ἤ...ἤ structures.
For the sake of the annotation, though, whenever an interpolated clause is easily isolated and doesn't alter the general structure of a sentence, it is maintained in the text. (Separating the brakets "from" field and using them to limit the interpolated sections as AuxG can be envisageable).

88	νῦν	altered by many (e.g. ἀλλ' Brunk,  πρὶν δ' Cambp), on account of the repetition of νῦν δέ in the following sentence (90). But the two temporal adv have different meaning: 1. "realis post irrealis" (Kam) 2. simply temporal (thus Jebb defends the particle). There is no objection to them. Kam expunged lines 90-1, considering them as author variants.

88	εἴα	thus Jebb, accepting Vauvillier's conjecture for the present ἐᾷ of the MSS. Criticized by Longo.

90	οὐ	added by Brunck, because a μή-statement governed by a negated verb is typically construed with οὐ as well. But the addiction does not seem needed: cf. Kam and Davis.

92	γ᾽	seems rather of the "confirmative" kind used in answers

95	,	the comma (#8) should be eliminated or replaced. (Note also that Jebb speaks openly against it! Whose text am I annotating then?)

95	φλογιζόμενον	either with Ἅλιον or with the preceding participle. The second is favoured by the most part of the commentators (Jebb, Cambp, Kam, Ll-J): 1. it creates a clear parallelism in a varied structure: ἐναριζομένα τίκτει / κατευνάζει φλογιζόμενον 2. aptly conveys "the image of a red sunset" (Cambp). Longo notes that the chiastic structure is, in truth, much lacking in balance: night has the great preeminence.

97	τοῦτο	proleptic structures with the anaphoric pronoun are always annotated as appositions

97	τὸν	the syntax is very difficult and it's further complicated by a  textual problem (see 97 παῖς). As it stands it provides a somewhat extreme example of prolepsis of the subject, which is aptly explained by East: "tell me about Alcmena's, where the son is". Stinton 127 discusses this phenomenon

97	παῖς	L's text (πόθι μοι πόθι μοι παῖς) is unmetrical. Jebb championed the solution (favoured by East as well) to delete the second μοι. Ll-J (loeb, but not - apparently - OCT) prefers to print semicolon after τὸν Ἀλκμήνας and to delete παῖς with Wunder

101	εἴπ᾽,	imperative, as it is typical in prayers

101	κρατιστεύων	the participial phrase redoubles the invocation, but it is not mere ornamental epithet. In the end of the prayer the Ch states the grounds of the request: no one sees like the sun, which is "the mightiest in respect of the seeing". It is the hymnic theme of the "namque potes" (δύνασαι δέ); so Davis rightly, who points to Norden (Agnostos, p. 221) and West ad Hes. Th. 420.

103	ποθουμένᾳ	only here in a purely mid. sense

104	ἀεί	very strained from its only logical reference τρύχεσθαι and separated from it by a clause which points to an opposite time relation (οὔποτ᾽ εὐνάζειν), as if it was: "always Deianira, like a sorrowful bird, never puts to rest her eyes but is consumed etc." 

104	ἀμφινεικῆ	Like Helen in A. Ag. 686 (τὰν δορίγαμβρον ἀμφινεικῆ θ᾽ Ἑλέναν)

105	οἷά	Neut. adv.: see LSJ

105	ὄρνιν	"Since ἄθλιον is sometimes an adj. of two endings, 	ὄρνιν may be considered feminine as in Ant. l.c. (sc. 423)" (Kam).

106	ἀδακρύτων	proleptic and predicative: "so that they may be tearless"

108	τρέφουσαν	Casaubon; φέρουσαν MSS. The conjecture has been widely accepted. Jebb thought the Mss text should not be lightly put aside, and that a meaning like "bearing as a burden" may be conceived. But in the end he considered δεῖμα not as suitable as object as words like πένθος. Kamerbeek defended the transmitted text.

109	εὐναῖς	local ("is consumed in her bed") or agent ("is consumed by her marriage without an husband that weigh upon the mind")? Jebb and Kam advocate the second: "by the desolate bed (= the desolateness of her bed)", Kamerbeek.

108	δεῖμα	the syntactic interpretation of the noun phrase is very complex, on account of 3 problems: 1. the double genitive ἀνδρός and ὁδοῦ 2. their construction (each of them can be interpreted as epesegetic/objective with δεῖμα or governed by εὔμναστον: "mindful of"?) 3. their mutual relation (is it ὁδοῦ ἀνδρός = "the road (i.e. the absence) of the man" or are the two equally governed by one of the possible heads listed at point n. 2?). Jebb connect the two genitive (with ἀνδρός depending on ὁδοῦ) and make the last the gen. of object of δεῖμα: "well-remembered fear for her husband's travels". But the word-order and  the general flowing of the sentence make this at least less probable: ὁδοῦ comes after the intervening participle and seems a later addiction to an already finished noun-phrase (Longo); it is best taken as a second (epexegetic, according to Kam) genitive: "on account of his being away"; Davis points at the double gen at 55-6. As for the first phrase, the choice is not easy. Ambiguity should not be ruled out, and it is indeed well favoured by the word-order: εὔμναστον ἀνδρὸς δεῖμα, with the gen. placed between two equally possible governing heads. "La struttura sintattica, con una molteplicità di rapporti intersecantisi, è tipica del periodo sofocleo, nel suo svilupparsi in forza del sopravvenire di elementi non predeterminati in partenza" (Longo).
The most rare between the two construction (gen governed by the adj.) is chosen for the sake of the annotation.

114	ἂν	a syllable is needed and Wakefield's ἂν is certainly preferable to Erfurdt's ἐν: 1. locative dative without preposition (εὐρέϊ πόντῳ) is common enough 2. potential optative without ἄν is unattested in Attic Greek

117	τὸ	adverbial (ducibus Easterling and Davis, which points to Denniston p. 166 for the common ellipse of τὸ μέν in the first colon), rather than nominative article with (thus, apparently, Jebb and Ll-J).

117	στρέφει	Casaubon; τρέφει MSS. But the transmitted lesson should certainly be retained (cf. also Ll-J&W Sophoclea p. 154). The construction and meaning of both τρέφειν αὔξειν though is very disputable. Longo (quoting A. Masaracchia) thinks of the Homeric κῦμα τροφόεντα (e.g. Il 15.608), which would point to the see being swollen and raised (αὔξειν). It is true that a parallelism with the first image (the winds) is more to the point than a reference to Herakles' glory (which makes the following ἀλλά rather pointless). But the obj τὸν Καδμογενῆ, even it has to be taken only with φέρειν, becomes completely pointless (Longo is forced to call it 'acc. pendens'). The scholia (as Kam points out) suggested an intransitive use of the active: αὔξω = αὐξάνομαι ('to be swollen up'), which is unattested before Aristotle.

118	πολύπονον	best taken together with πέλαγος as attr, than as an equivalent (without article!) of τὸ πολύπονον βιότου (= "οἱ πολλοὶ πόνοι τοῦ βίου", Kam): see Easterling for the objections to this construction.

118	ὥσπερ	the metaphor of the Cretan see is the only subj for the two verbs (see on 118 πολύπονον): "as it were a Creatan see of life's troubles" (East). For the comparatio compendiaria where the 1st term is omitted altogether see 770-1, with Longo's note. (It is annotated as a "as"-clause (with the "as" AuxY), than as a "like" (AuxC with or without elided verb).)

122	ὧν	referred back to the situation mentioned in 103-ss (Jebb), and governed by the verb; not to be intended as obj of 

122	ἐπιμεμφομένα	the nominative is well defended by Longo; in spite of the syntactic difficulty of having the accusative (σε) with the verb, a reference to Deian's "blaming Herakles for his fate" ("to blame" is the only meaning) would be pointless.

123	αἰδοῖα	Musgrave (accepted also by East); ἁδεῖα MSS, retained by Ll-J and Davis; rightly: "il valore di ἁδεῖα, paragonabile a OT 82, è 'con animo amico'" (Longo); the conjecture is therefore pointless.

126	(οὐ)δ᾽	rightly explained by Denn (GP p. 195 II), quoted by Kam: the grounds for a certain statement, which logically precedes, are expressed as second thought, coordinate with καί and οὐδέ; so, the thought is: "Zeus never gave a painless lot, therefore you should not despair". An emphasizing οὐδέ (Jebb, Ll-J: "not even Zeus") would give the wrong idea.

129	ἐπὶ	generally intended as a tmesis; others (Hermann, Ellendt) connects ἐπὶ πᾶσι

129	χαρὰ	is nominative and, therefore, also πῆμα; this implies that ἐπικυκλέω should be taken as intransitive in meaning, which is unattested until Plutarch: see Davis, who rightly recalls Soph's fondness for the intransitive construction of transitive verbs (see Cambp Essay p. 88). Ll-J&W accept χαρὰν (K) that makes κέλευθοι sbj of the verb.

131	μένει	it is the first sentence of the epode; the text in Perseus is then wrong: the sentence should be corrected and joined to the following.

133	(οὔ)τε	the subjects of the three verbs may be construed differently: in the treebank night, disgrace and richness are taken as sbj of all the verbs; see on 135 καὶ for the other options.

134	τῷ	τῷ δ᾽ implies an equivalent τῷ μέν in the preceding clause of the antithesis. It is nevertheless annotated as belonging only to the second part.

135	καὶ	the construction of χαίρειν and στέρεσθαι is uncertain. Jebb takes them as a subjects of ἐπέρχεται; others (quoted by Jebb; and see Ll-J's translation) as subjects of both ἐπέρχεται and βέβακε. Others, again, as epesegetical ("(the things mentioned above) go and come back, so that we can enjoy and be deprived of them". This last seems clearly preferable in view of the antithesis in them which mirrors that in ἐπέρχεται / βέβακε.

136	ἃ	difficult to construe: 1. acc. of relation: "in respect to which things" (i.e. the general truths stated above) 2. construction with a (proleptic) relative pronoun doubled by a demonstrative in the same clause (type ὅστις ὅδε): see Campb's translation, Kam and Longo, who also quotes Bruhn 192.II and K-G 2 433. The first is smoother but what could "those things" possibly mean? How could the pronoun possible refere to Herakles's fate? Therefore 2 seems better.

137	ἐλπίσιν	construction without ἐν

143	τ᾽	Harleianus and conj. Dobree; δ' MSS; the transmitted text is kept by Jebb, which therefore is not the edition reproduced in the treebank! Note the fact that "wish for the future and statement of the present state of things are paratactically expressed" (Kam).

145	τοιοῖσδε	either retrospective (pointing to ἄπειρος εἶ and to the unexperienced life of the chorus) or proleptic (the description that follows).

145	αὑτοῦ	the only possible meaning of this phrase is "in these places of its own": it is surely difficult and has been vigourously suspected (see Dawe, Stud. 3.80); yet Catullus (62.39: 'ut flos in saeptis secretus nascitur hortis') yields indeed a significant support, pace Davis. It is, on other grounds, defended by Ll-J&W (sophoclea 155).

145	θεοῦ	the Sun, as often without any other indication; the shelter against the burning heath of the mediterranean sun is frequently associated with the praise of the locus amoenus (see Davis).

150	πρὸς	Soph likes to vary with the construction of the verb of fears (cf. 671). Here, "φοβεῖσθαι is not passive and πρός signifies the origin of the fear" (Longo).

151	τις	masculine, in view of the following αὑτοῦ (see 151 αὑτοῦ)

151	εἰσίδοιτο	"might see of himself" (mid.), Cambp.

151	αὑτοῦ	masculine: the discourse is more general (although still concerned with women's conditions, and still seen from a woman's perspective).

152	κακοῖσιν	two constructions are possible: 1. = κακὰ οἷς βαρύνομαι: the antecedent of the relative clause is attracted in the case of the rel. pronoun 2. οἷς = οἴοις and the whole clause (κακοῖσιν οἷς ἐγὼ βαρύνομαι) = indirect question. In both cases (see, respectively, Jebb and Longo) the subst. is strangely placed. Solution 1 is favoured by the majority of the interpreters (for 2 Kam and Ll-J's translation).

153	μὲν	peculiar (and otherwise unattested) combination of particles (μὲν οὖν δὴ). οὖν δὴ (for which Denn 469-70) is very common in Plato and Hdt. "[A]s both οὖν and δὴ are used both for connexion and for emphasis, we may perhaps regard the earlier particle in each combination as connective, the second as ancillary" (Denniston, 469): οὖν should be AuxY and δὴ AuxZ, therefore. Here μέν is clearly anticipatory and has strong meaning in light of the following δέ (154). Influence of the common μέν οὖν (AuxY + AuxZ) is surely present (Longo).

157	ἐγγεγραμμένην	construed with the acc object of the active verb (ἐγγράφω); Jebb recalls Verg. Ecl. 3. 106 "inscripti nomina", which is very similar.

159	οὔπω	L and R (οὕτω recc., adopted among others by Person, Dain, Davis and Ll-J) seems right: see Kam, who rightly states that the idea "that on former occasions Heracles did allude to the oracle but in vaguer terms" is absurd. Longo ascribes the peculiar construct to a stylistic mark of Sophocles, who often repetes negations and temporal particles (cf. 1014).

160	ἀλλ	the sentence verges almost to anacoluthon: logically, οὐκ ἔτλη... οὔπω φράσαι is opposed to ὥς τι δράσων εἷρπε ("before, for all of his many journeys, he never dared to reveal those oracles, but he went always as to accomplish some deed, not as to die"), the attributive relation of the first clause (ἁμοὶ, related to the ξυνθήματα)  is lost in the second.

160	ὥς	with both participles (AuxY). The construction is somewhat zeugmatic (Longo): 1. with future part. = final, expressing the intentions 2. pres. part = insight and prevision ("as thinking that he would face the death").

161	τι	MSS have undivided ὅτι, which is defended by Kam, in view of the fact that the custom was for the widow's family to take all her dowry back. But it was still the task of the husband to apportion the parts (Longo); this and the symmetry favour the word division.

163	διαιρετὸν	here fem., with two terminations instead of three (see Dawe Stud. 3.105). Frequently so with verbal adj.: see Jebb on OT 384.

164	προτάξας	ambiguous construction and translation: Jebb's interpretation is followed in the tb

165	κἀνιαύσιον	Brunck; κἀνιαύσιος MSS, which is favoured by most editors. The change of construction is rather bold but not impossible

170	ἐκτελευτᾶσθαι 	can be governed by either ἔφραζε or εἱμαρμένα

170	πόνων	2 interpretations are most widespread: 1. to take the gen as if it was gov. by περί and being a complement of relation: "in regards to" (Jebb) 2. to take it with the verb ἐκτελευτᾶσθαι, as it was (a) a gen. separationis with ἐκ (b) gov. by the nominal idea in the verb ('be the end of his toils') 3. partitive: between his toils (Herman?). Davis favours n.2 (accepted by East and Ll-J&W as well) because the NP τελευτή πόνων is very frequent. 

172	ἐκ	the exact meaning is disputed, given also the ambiguity about the role and the very identity of the priestess called 'Doves'; yet ἐκ implying means and instrument ('by the mouth of') is most probable

174	ὡς	different solutions, and thus different morphological interpretations, have been argued: 1. = ὥστε (schol., Jebb) 2. modal ('quomodo'): Davis and Longo (though see below) 3. some correct to ᾧ with Hense (Dawe, East). As for n.2, Davis takes the modal as a sort of relative ('it must happen now as it must happen'), while Longo makes it epesegetical with ναμέρτεια. N. 1 is followed, though Longo's construction is tempting.

176	φόβῳ	with ταρβοῦσα according to Jebb and Davis; with ἐκπηδᾶν, following Kam, who also notes the enjambement

176	εἴ	construction with verb of fear + εἰ: cf. 666. East quotes Goodwin p. 376, but the reference is not clear.

179	πρὸς	as Jebb says, "refers to καταστεφῆ": it explains and justifies the attire of the messenger; χάριν, accepted by Ll-J&W, ('in order to speak', taken either with καταστεφῆ or just with στείχοντα) is surely out of place.

192	ἄπεστιν	there is ambiguity about the subject of both verbs. Lichas is implied by the Messenger's answer; but probably Dianeira is thinking about Heracles himself.

193	οὐκ	litote: 'he's not enjoying much facility (for moving forward)" (Jebb) = he can't move at all. But the scope of negation can be debatable.

195	κρίνει	= ἀνακρίνει

195	βῆναι	"aor. set forward from the place where he is halting: stronger than “βαίνειν”, keep moving on. Cp. “βῆναι” said of death, O. C.1226" (Jebb). 

196	ποθοῦν	is very disputed (Stinton argued vigourously for corruption). But the excellent parallel of Ph. 675 and the typical idiom with subst. neut participle makes corruption very improbable (cf. Denniston). The neuter cannot be equal to τὸ ποθούμενον ('what the heard desires') as the Schol. would have it. Its meaning can only be "the desire", "the activity of desiring" or "the state of having a desire" (Deniston). In view of S. Ph. 675, the abstract notion can be equaled to the person, so that τὸ ποθοῦν = οἱ ποθοῦντες (or, more precisely, "the crowd as persons desiring"). But the relation with the nominative ἕκαστος is not clear: 1. it can be partitive apposition (Hermann): "the desire (of the crowd), everybody wishing to learn in full, would never let him go" 2. it can be the subj. of ἐκμαθεῖν (Denniston, East): "everybody, wishing his desire to learn everything"; I fail to see why this last option should be "scarcely Greek" (Stinton).

197	μεθεῖτο	μεθίημι typically construed with the gen. Kamerbeek would have it with the acc. here, governing ποθοῦν (see 196) with the meaning 'give up his longing to know'. But the main meaning of the verb is "let go" and its literary sense here (with the crowd taking hold of Lichas and refusing to let him depart) is excellent. Lichas should be therefore the implied obj.

198	δὲ	as at l. 18, the balance of the antithesis is peculiar: ἑκοῦσι δὲ adds a supplementary condensed opposition to a simple syntax. Here the variation plays also on the meaning of the ἑκών in the polyptotic anaphora: in the first case it means 'willing', in the second the sense shifts to 'glad' (Longo). Nauck's conjecture ἑκουσίοις for ἑκοῦσι δὲ (accepted by Ll-J&W) is worse than useless.

201	ἀλλὰ	considered as an apodotic ἀλλὰ (thus AuxY) with subordinate clause elided: '(though you denied it for long'), still after a long time you gave us joy'. Rare in prose, this idiom is quite frequent in trag. and comedy, especially with νῦν or (σὺν) (τῷ) χρόνῳ: Denniston 12-3.

203	ὡς	φωνήσατ... ὡς = not 'proclaim aloud... how', but 'lift your voice..., since' (Jebb and Kam)

203	ἐμοὶ	I take it with ἄελπτον; it could also go with ἀνασχὸν as a dativus commodi (East). Note the shift from the 1st plural of the verb (καρπούμεθα) to the 1st sg. of the pronoun.

205	ἀνολολυξάτω	MSS (except for some recentior, who have) give ἀνολολυξέτε δόμοις ἐφεστίοις ἀλαλαῖς ὁ μελλόνυμφος, which is against both metre and grammar (ἀνολολυξέτε is a vox nihil). The most popular restoration is Burges' ἀνολολυξάτω δόμος. To this Jebb objects that: 1. it strains the meaning of μελλόνυμφος too far ('the house ready for a coming marriage' i.e. reunion of husband and wife: so East) 2. the opposition conveyed by δὲ ports on ἀρσένων and it's best taken as a female-vs-male antithesis; besides, since Deian asked for a chorus of women's voices, it is fitting that the first mention is for the maidens. 2 is rather dubious: from Deian's address to the beginning of the choral song, the attention shifts to the mariage theme, by combining the song of (young) girls (cf. παρθένοι) and male singers. Therefore, I follow Longo in retaining both ὁ μελλόνυμφος and δόμοις (although accepting ἀνολολυξάτω): ὁ μελλόνυμφος is a generic masculine, 'the soon-to-be wed', which is later specified in male and παρθένοι.

207	ἐν	adverbial in the phrase ἐν δὲ, 'and besides'.

209	Ἀπόλλω	"acc. τὸν εὐφ. Ἀπ. depends on ἴτω κλαγγὰ as='ὑμνείτω'" (Jebb)

214	ἀμφίπυρον	"with fire (i.e. torches) on both hands", a common portrait of a Thracian/Asian goddess identified with Artemis

216	ἀείρομαι	intransitive, 'I am lifted up', referred (as the following verb: see 216 ἀπώσομαι) to the choral performance

216	ἀπώσομαι	performative future (see Davis' definition)

219	μ᾽	attached to ἰδού by Jebb. But this seems impossible, on account of the exclamatory nature of the interjection. Many follow Wilamowitz and delete the second μ᾽ after εὐοῖ. If both are retained it is best to consider it a case of repetition (AuxY).

220	ἅμιλλαν	internal obj. with ὑποστρέφων, με being the proper (implied, pace Kamerbeek) direct obj.

225	φρουρὰν	"Greek says '[nor did it escape] me, my eye's vigilance'" (East). This construction is explained as a case of what is called 'accusative of the  whole and part' (σχῆμα καθ' ὅλον καὶ μέρος: Moorhouse p. 41). It is a sort of partitive apposition where the 2 acc's are typically body parts in relation to the whole persons (e.g. Ant. 319: σ' ἀνιᾷ τὰς φρένας). It is annotated as a case of apposition (typically without appositive particles).

227	προὐννέπω	bivalent (with 2 objs), like ἐννέπειν.

230	κατ᾽	the expression comes to mean: "according to the achievement of the deed", with κτῆμα = acquisition > achievement.

232	πρῶθ᾽	the 2 πρῶτα may be ambiguous: they both may be adj or adv. Taking the first as adv ('first, tell me'), the second as (predicative) adj seems the preferable solution (Easterling).

238	ὁρίζεται	same meaning as the active: 'set boundaries of' > 'establish' ('mark off': Jebb and LL-J)

240	ᾕρει	for the greatest part of the edd. is a conative imperfect ('as he tried to sack'); Campb has it as a sort of durative ('conquered and made homeless'). In one case the vow is a promise that precedes the fulfillment; in the other, it is an act of thanksgiving.

251	ὅτου	neut. according to Jebb ('dislike of the tale of which...'); masc. with λόγος for Kam.: this last is more porbable 

264	δ᾽	the μέν/δέ opposition is here (as often) very strained: πολλὰ μὲν λόγοις would lead to expect the second leg to deal with ἔργα (Hermann), but in fact the two terms opposed λόγοις/φρενί are semantically very near. The construction is also rather unclear: we have to 1. suppose zeugma: πολλὰ μὲν λόγοις ἐπερρόθησε, πολλὰ [ἐπερρόθησε] δ᾽ ἀτηρᾷ φρενί, but then the opposition is not very intelligible (Jebb thinks that a more general verb like ὕβρισε must be implied from the content to balance λόγοις ἐπερρόθησε with a different class of non-verbal abuses) 2. to suppose the opposition as between the noun phrases alone "he loaded him with abuse, evilly spoken and evilly intended" (East). But we would need an epithet to go with λόγοις to distinguish one class of verbal taunts from another and πολλά is strange (East supplies an ἀτηροῖς from the following adj, and reads  πολλὰ μὲν... πολλὰ δ᾽ as emphatic: not very convincingly). 3. to suppose lacuna (Dawe) or interpolation (Stinton). Jebb's solution of a strained zeugma still appears the best.

265	μὲν postponed after χεροῖν for metrical reasons, according to Jebb and most of the edd. and comm.; thus the antithesis is really pivoted on λέγων. Hermann (quoted by Longo), on the other hand, replace the scope of the following δέ, from the governing verb to the declarative clause, as if it were δοῦλος (δὲ) ῥαίοιτο.

267	δὲ	here too the variation in the antithesis is pushed to the limits. After λέγων... μὲν the participle construction is broken and φωνεῖ δὲ follows (so that the last clause is, syntactically, on the same level as the main clause of the sentence opening). Stinton (who nonetheless finds the close parallelism between the varied verbs λέγειν and φωνεῖν rather disconcerting) brings good parallels for this kind of variation.

267	ἀνδρὸς	with δοῦλος in a very emphatic and pleonastic construction (the word 'slave' already implies the idea of a free master). Others (from the scholia on) take it as gen. of agent with ῥαίοιτο, which is left without complement.

267	ῥαίοιτο	"is crushed": the text is difficult to understand ('he said that, as a slave of free man, he was always being crushed'?)  and perhaps deeply corrupt.

268	δείπνοις	dative of occasion; frequently in the plural (cf. OT 779, El 203)

269	ὧν	genitive of the cause ('having wrath on account of those things').

271	ἵππους	impossible to tell whether masc or fem (Kam). But Iphitus' horses are surely fem in Od. 22.21 (ἵππους διζήμενος, αἵ οἱ ὄλοντο).

272	δὲ	again a zeugmatic construction with μέν..δέ; and again an antithesis where rhetorical opposition is, perhaps, more important than strict logic. Logically, Iphitos has his eyes and mind busy in the search, away from the present danger: that what chiefly matters in the situation. Sophocles' Greek says: "when he had his eyes turned on one side, his mind on the other". Jebb and others take it to mean: "he had his eyes on the search; he could not find the horses, so his mind was wondering considering the other places where they could be".

279	δὲ	"i.e., they like it as little as mortals do" (Jebb)

281	κεῖνοι	κεῖνοι... αὐτοὶ μὲν... πόλις δὲ: example of distributive apposition; typically there is conjunction in such reprise of the subject (τε...τε is typical); here there's opposition, even bec

282	τάσδε	attraction in the case of the rel pron

286	δὲ	in this irregular correlation (τε...δὲ) "the idea of contrast is added to the original idea of addition"; East points out that it tends to be used in the expressions of the type: "he started the job, I finish it".

292	δὲ	another spectacular variation in the coordinated structures: here the gen abs. is in relation to a participle in dative (grammatically referred to the ind. obj μοι). Since both perform the syntactic function of adjuncts, there is no need for a zeugmatic elliptic structure. See Jebb for examples of gen abs joined to participle in accord with (pro)nouns.

292	παρόντων	can be either feminine ('those girls who are here present') or neuter ('the present circumstances' ). I follow Easterling in adopting the neut.

296	σκοπουμένοις		could also be read as neuter passive: "once the things are well considered". But a veiled allusion to Deianeira herself is more probable

297	πράσσοντα	interpreted by almost all as a second complement of ταρβεῖν, with the μὴ clause following, as if we had ταρβεῖν μὴ σφαλῇ ὁ εὖ πράσσων (cf. Ph  493-4, Med 37, KG ii/2 579-ss quoted by Davis). Thus τὸν εὖ πράσσοντα = Herakles. But, as Cambp saw, it could also be the sbj of ταρβεῖν and = Deianeira.

300	τ᾽	"one of the numberless instances of adjectives with ἀ-privans following in succession, creating a pathetic effect (here enhanced by the rhythm, often (esp. in Eur.) by asyndeton)". Rightly, Kam reminds that typically these series of epithets don't have any coordinative particle.

301	ἦσαν	since "being descended from freeborn fathers" = "being of free status", this situation is subject to change and therefore the imperfect; thus Jebb, sensibly.

308	πρὸς	"judging by", Jebb (cf. Ph 885); not rightly labelled in LSJ as = φύσει

309	τῶνδε	the μέν... δέ antithesis strongly suggests to refer this τῶνδε to the circumstances of Iole's captivity on scene, rather than to the aforementioned realities (marriage and childbirth), as Kamerbeek and Davis point out.

313	ὅσῳπερ	the construction is, according to Jebb, analogous to ὅσῳ(περ) with comparatives/superlatives: cf Hes. Op. 40, ὅσῳ πλέον ἥμισυ παντός, LSJ V. Here, as in OC 742 (see Jebb's note), πλεῖστον is implied, though the sentence ends with μόνη (in itself a sort of mark of uniqueness alternative to the superlative) which brings a little variation.

314	καὶ	stress the content of the verb: 'why should you *ask* me' (Denniston, p. 315)

316	τις	attribute of σπορά in the only possible interpretation of this line: "was she *an* of offspring of Euritus?" (Kam) or "was she *possibly* a daughter of Euritus?" (East). The other interpretations don't make any sense.

317	καὶ	a remarkable accumulation of particles; καὶ γάρ is analyzed by Denniston with γάρ connective ('for', closer to AuxC), and καί = either: 1. 'even' (with subsequent words) 2. 'in fact' 3. 'both', answered by another καί (108). Here n.2 is the right interpretation (Longo), with the following connective οὐδέ, something like: "I don't know, for neither, in fact, I enquired", in place of a flatter οὐ γὰρ.

318	ἔχεις	of the possession of informations, as = πέπυσμα (Ant. 9: ἔχεις τι κεἰσήκουσας), with πρός expressing the source of the knowledge; elsewhere ὄνομα ἔχειν = ὀνομάζεσθαι (Longo).

319	ἤνυτον	"gradually made my way (impf.); whereas ἤνυσα would have suited a quick journey" (Jebb on Ant. 231)

320	ἀλλ᾽	according to Denniston (p. 13) is the kind of apodotic ἀλλά without expressed protasis, rare in prose but frequent in drama: "Well, (since Lichas didn't ask anything and cannot answer me), you should tell it to me by yourself". It is pointless to argue which term is modified by ἀλλά (whether ἡμίν or ἐκ σαυτῆς); ἀλλά is a sentence-adverbial and affects all the sentence, as Campb, followed by Longo, saw. On the position of ἀλλά (after the imperative and the invocation) see Denniston p. 22-3.

321	καὶ	in causal clauses, it typically marks an addition, either to the content of the main clause or the a general unexpressed thought (= 'in addition to anything else'), but "decision is often difficult, and the particle may adhere either to the causal conjunction or to the word or expression following καί" (Denn. 296-7); this seems the case here: καί, as well as τοι, seem to adhere to ξυμφορά ('an actual misfortune': Denniston).

321	εἰδέναι	the syntax is rather obscure; two interpretations seem possible, and Longo sees a tragic ambiguity, not without irony, in this contrast: 1. = ξυμφορά (σοι) μὴ εἰδέναι (ἡμᾶς) σέ γ᾽ ἥτις εἶ 'it is a disgrace indeed for you that we don't know who you are' 2. ξυμφορά (μοι) etc. The only possible meaning in the dialogue is 1. But te irony, for Longo, is in the fact that sense n.2 is syntactically easier, and, in the long term of the tragedy, more authentic than n.1. Others speak of "dramatically significant exaggeration" (Davis) of a courteous speech: 'it is a pity for me not to know who you are' (Ll-J).

322	οὔ	logically superflous (cf. 223 ἐξ)

323	ἐξ	the syntax is very strained (on account of Licha's desire to block Deianeira's enquiries which lead to an anomalous cumulation of negative particles, according to Longo). The meaning seems to be "she will not speak like before, if she ever speaks at all". Two interpretations are already to be found in the scholia (acc. to Kam: verify!): 1. οὐδὲν = obj of διήσει: i.e. 'she will utter no word, like she has done hitherto'; 2. "she will utter no word in the same manner as before", taking οὐδὲν as negation particle with the modal phrase ἐξ ἴσου χρόνῳ τῷ πρόσθεν. I follow Campb, Jebb and East with n.2.

323	διήσει	Wakefield, διοίσει MSS, defended by Hermann, but rejected by the majority of interpreters.

327	διήνεμον 	epithetus ornans (Jebb); Kam defends Hermann's view of a predicative (cf. Mazon: 'dispersée aux vents').

328	συγγνώμην	habet cur ignoscas (Kam)

329	δ᾽	'permissive' δ᾽ οὖν: Denniston 466 (in general, D thinks that δέ is adversative and οὖν strengthening)

331	ἄλλην	Triclinian mss, λύπην LRa

331	λάβῃ	Blaydes, λάβοι MSS; B's conjecture is followed by Jebb and Ll-J, but it's arshly criticized by Kam; rightly, I think

335	ἀμμείνασ᾽	with  a χώρει to be mentally supplied; usually when there is a γε# in these sentences, the verb is easily recoverable: see Jebb.

336	τ᾽	Triclinian mss, γ' AUY, omittunt alii; an integration is needed to fill the metre. With Triclinius' τ᾽ the construction of the coordinated clause is sharply varied: it starts as if two interrogative would follow μάθῃς, then another verb (ἐκμάθῃς) introduces a new final clause governed by ὅπως, so that the flow is: ὅπως μάθῃς... καὶ ἐκμάθῃς.

337	πάντ᾽	if sound, it must be constructed adverbially with the expression ἐπιστήμην ἔχω; Jackson's radical emendation is accepted by Ll-J&W

339	τοῦ	causal genitive

340	οὐδὲ	οὐδὲ τὸν πάρος μῦθον … οὐδὲ νῦν, with double οὐδὲ not to be confused with οὔτε (Jebb): the first = emphasizing (AuxZ), the second coordinating

342	δῆτα	in questions "always has a logical connective force" (Denniston 269); here it is used with int. part. (Denniston 271 n. 4)

344	τ᾽	the two datives may be 1. governed by an ἐξειπεῖν implied from the previous sentence 2. a dative of interest. 2 is simpler

344	εἴργεται	passive

345	δὴ	non-connective καὶ δὴ, it "signifies, vividly and dramatically, that something is actually taking place at the moment" (Denniston 250): 'and lo!'; here it's the special case where it marks the completion of the instruction given before (p. 251 iii).

366	ὡς	prep with δόμους; it is either preserved, on the ground that "household" typically means the inanimate as well as the animate components of an estate, or altered to ἐς.

371	μέσῃ	"here implies, ‘open,’ ‘public,’ as in “ἔδειξ̓...ἐς μέσον” ( Ph.609 n.)" (Jebb).

376	πημονὴν	the construction of the NP is debated (see Kam), and the interpretations are very complex. Yet the structure is somehow quite clear: an interrogative pron. + a name, further specified by adjs (Davis, who quotes Sansone AC 52 (1983), 231); here, of the two epithets that accompanies the name, ὑπόστεγον strongly hints to a predicative function with the verb, so that his meaning is resultative ('I have taken her under my roof'), while the second is more attributive ('Iole is a secret misfortune'): this is the element of complication in the structure.

379	ἦ	sentence-division, spelling of the particle, word attribution and general interpretation are highly disputable and debated. Η of the MSS can be made into: 1. (ἀνώνυμος) ἢ κάρτα λαμπρά: 'is she nameless or glorious?', obviously continuing the previous sentence (and thus D's speech) 2. ἡ κάρτα λαμπρά: '(is she nameless), she that looks so splendid?', again continuing D's previous sentence and speech; 3. ἦ κάρτα λαμπρά: 'indeed, she is certainly splendid'. In this last case, since ἦ κάρτα λαμπρά often opens answers, it can be possible to ascribe this line either to D (as in L) or to the Messenger (as the mss of the Roman family do, followed by Jebb). Yet those lines (with whatever interpretation) are very fitting in the mouth of D, with their insistence on the particular of Iole's beauty (see ὄμμα).

379	ὄμμα	easy as the corruption from ὄνομα to ὄμμα may be, the transmitted text should certainly not be tampered. λαμπρά certainly point to the the external aspect, bearing and appearance of a person, which is also perfectly conveyed by φύσιν; a person can be λαμπρός for her name and status (φύσις) only if her identity is clearly known and widely spoken, which is precisely not the case here.

382	δῆθεν	expressing sarcasm and indignation: 'since of course he didn't ask' (Ll-J). Doubts can be raised as to the scope of the sent. adv., especially for the position: but see Denniston p. 266 and Davis.

383	τι μήτι (or μή τι) with optative of wishes, as regular negation

385	ὡς	"(I ask you) for" (Kamerbeek; see also Ellendt s.v. II.B.4, p. 806).

387	τάχ᾽	"perhaps" (sent. adv.)

388	ἀπὸ	here = "not away from good judgement" i.e. without good judgement: cf. the Homeric ἀπὸ δόξης (Davis). Yet, it is true that the phrase would normally denote origine and thus: 'from a sound mind' (see Davis' note).

391	ἀλλ᾽	in Greek, the coordination between a pred. adj and a prepositional phrase is normal; but since those two elements perform a distinct syntactic function in the PDT annotation system, the construction must be annotated as zeugmatic (ὅδ᾽ ἀνὴρ οὐκ ἐμῶν ὑπ᾽ ἀγγέλων [πορεύεται], ἀλλ᾽ αὐτόκλητος ἐκ δόμων πορεύεται)

394	ὡς	Wakefield; εἰσορᾷς MSS, which could stand, as parenthetic use of ὁρᾶν are commun (Davis).

395	ἐκ	frequently with fem adj. with governing noun generically implied: see Jebb ad Ant 994

398	καὶ	on ἦ καὶ in question see Denniston 285.5.ii: può 1. marcare insistenza nell'interrogazione (AuxZ with ἦ) 2. significare "also" e rafforzare una parola nella frase. Kam argues for n. 2, whereas Longo doesn't expres any preference. I adopt n. 1

398	νέμεις	νεμεῖς (Nauck) should be read instead

400	δῆτ᾽	connective (but also emphatic, with the interrogative particle), Kamerbeek

403	ἐρωτήσας	periphrastic perfect with ἔχω, particularly dear to Soph.; the periphrastic nature of the construction is questionable, according to some: see Kamerbeek and Longo.

412	ποικίλας	again periphrasis for the perfect (see on 403); transitive or intransitive? I follow LSJ (but without any particular reason) in taking it as intransitive, with τί = "why". But the free translations of Jebb and Ll-J seem to imply that both τί and οὐδέν in the answer are objects.

413	κάρτα	"prorsus", "in very deed", strengthening the verb

414	δ᾽	= γάρ

414	πάλαι	with ἦ, according to Kam; but all the others take it with κλύων

415	οὔ	note the objective negative, stronger than μή with the implied imperative (Longo)

415	βραχύ	can be taken ἀπὸ κοινοῦ, but connection with ἱστορούμενος is stronger, on account of w-o; internal obj. with the passive ἱστορούμενος (= ἐρωτώμενος).

419	ταύτην	note that she is not present on scene; see also the present tense ὁρᾷς, for an action which refers to Licha's behaviour with Iole in the past, up to the previous scene.

419	ὑπ᾽	must introduce a modal phrase, with ὁρᾷς: "you look at her in/with ignorance"; modal ὑπό (licensed to describe the manner of an action) is common with sounds, lights (ὑπὸ λαμπάδων) and external constraints (Jebb); inner feelings or state of conscience are nowhere else found in this construction; many have judged the text suspect on these grounds.

419	Ἰόλην	in Engl. we would say: "didn't you say that the girl you were leading was Iole, daughter of Euritus". In the Greek sentence, the name is used almost as a predicative adj.: "that you were leading this girl as Iole, daughter of Euritus". Yet predicative annotation (ATV) is best reserved for authentic predicative adj.'s, such as Tr. 428: δάμαρτα... ταύτην ἄγειν, "lead her as a wife", i.e. "so as to become the wife".

421	πόθεν	note the cumulation of interrogative pronouns/adv, characteristic of tragic dialogue

422	πάρα	Bothe, παρών MSS; commonly accepted (except for Kam, Longo and Davis), but called into question by Davis, who stresses the 'use of παρών to make emphasis'.

423	πολλοῖσιν	answers ποίοις ἐν ἀνθρώποισι; some supply the prep, either by changing the text and reading πολλοῖς ἐν (Wakefield), or just mentally, by taking it from the previous line. Longo stress the ambiguity of the simple dative which could be also read as obj of the preceding ἔφασκες ("you were saying that to many").

424	εἰσήκουσ		with two arguments: hear something (acc) from somebody (gen), as in S. El. 884. Note that this verb is a good example of different valency with different meanings: "pay heed" with the dat.; "hear" something with acc./gen.; "hear/learn something from somebody" with acc and gen.

425	γ᾽	affirmative/limitative: "yes, but..." (Longo); or maybe affirmative and stressing κλύειν; thus Denniston, p. 149: "Aye, *said* they heard" (with different interpretation of the syntax).

425	ἔφασκον	can be 1st or 3rd person; so the sentence can be read in two ways: 1. "Yes, but I (merely) said that I heard that" (Longo, Ll-J); or "Yes, they say that they heard that", Jebb, Denniston, and perhaps Kamerbeek (de aliis non liquet). The exchange of these last sentences may suggest that εἰσήκουσε (424) and κλυεῖν have the same subjects (the crowd); but perhaps 1 is more probable on account of the following gnome and of the imperfect tense (which would not be very clear if Lichas was accusing the crowd of spreading false reports on his speech). Also, note the insistence of Lichas speech-acts: ἔφασκες (420), ἔφασκον (425), ἔφασκες (428), which is more to the point.

427	ποίαν	a very lively idiom (subst. taken from the other speaker and questioned with ποῖος): see East and LSJ s.v. ποῖος n. 2; only here in tr.

429	ἐγὼ	again colloquial and lively: sbj and obj are repeated from the previous sentence uttered by the counterpart

430	τόνδε	same construction as in lines 1-ss: sbj of the subordinate anticipated as obj

432	Λυδία	a very condensed expression: ἡ Λυδία = the Lydian woman (Omphale) = his grudge at the enslavement to her

433	φανείς	emphatic by verse end, almost pleonastic: cf. l. 1 (Longo).

435	ληρεῖν	from λῆρος (of sounds that are "showy but useless" LSJ), = typically "be foolish"; here it is constructed as a verb of speaking (the dat. is on the analogy of διαλέγεσθαί τινι, Jebb and Longo). Note that, semantically, its meaning ('speak foolish words to somebody who is insane') is proleptic, and it's justified by the following obj νοσοῦντι: i.e. it is precisely the fact that the other speaker is insane that makes the talk 'foolish' (Kam).

436	σε	idiomatic: "in supplications the poets often insert the enclitic σε between πρός and the gen. of that by which one adjures" (Jebb on OC 250); the accusative is perhaps derived from (λίσσομαί vel sim.) σε πρὸς etc. (Kam); but the construction tends to become a fixed expression of supplication (especially in Euripides), so that we cannot speak of ellipsis anymore (Longo), as the collocation of the pronoun also suggests. Thus, σε is annotated as a "clause adverbial" that stress the utterance context of the supplication (AuxY).  

440	αὐτοῖς	can be interpreted either as: 1. neuter and obj of χαίρειν: "(human beings -- ὅ ἄνθρωπος: cf. τἀνθρώπων) do not find pleasure always in the same things" (Jebb, Mazon, Longo, East, Davis) 2. masculine and dative of interest / dat. of possession: "being happy is not always for the same persons" i.e. the same persons cannot be happy forever (Campb, Scheid., Kam). With 1 the reference is to the transfer of Herakles' favours to Iole; with 2. Deianira's present unhappiness is hinted. Int. 1 is clearly preferable, in light of grammar and meaning.

444	οἵας	= οἵα γ' ἐγὼ εἰμί or ὡς ἐμοῦ: attraction in genitive ("epic-type attraction of the relative clause without verb", Davis, quoting Chantraine GH 2.237).

446	μεμπτός	act.: "throwing blame upon" (LSJ); here also with two endings (=fem), not three

453	ὡς	the sentence mixes two different constructions: 1. ἐλευθέρῳ ψευδεῖ καλεῖσθαι οὐ καλόν ἐστιν 2. ἐλευθέρῳ κὴρ τοῦ ψευδεῖ καλεῖσθαι πρόσεστιν, shifting from 1. to 2. (Longo); the value of the dative changes consequently, from an apparent dativus incommodi to obj. of πρόσεστιν

460	τί	postponed, since the emphasis (in the μέν... δέ structure) is on another word: see Longo, who quotes Thomson

485	χάριν	the adj. κοινή makes χάριν retain more of its substantival force, so that it verges more toward the adverb than preposition; note that, as it is the rule with 1st and 2nd person, χάριν governs the adj σήv (instead of the pronoun in genitive); the pron. of 3rd p. κείνου generates the expected variation in the coordination between adj of 2nd p. and personal pron.

490	καὶ	after demonstratives "denotes that the word following it add something, and something important too, to the content of the demonstrative. Or, to look at it in another way, καί binds the demonstrative more closely to the following word" (Denniston 307). In English, we would expect 'also' to go with the demonstrative.

498	ἐκφέρεται	two constructions only are admissible for this puzzling opening: 1. σθένος... νίκας = "triumph", with σθένος used like κράτος and νίκας = gen. epexegeticum ("the might consisting in victory") 2. Wakefileld's punctuation, as advocated by Stinton: μέγα τι σθένος ἁ Κύπρις (nominal sentence: "a mighty power indeed is Kypris")· ἐκφέρεται νίκας (acc. pl.) ἀεί; this last solution is neat and probably correct: for the asyndeton see Pi. O. 6.72-4. For other interpretations (with sensible remarks) see Stinton.

500	παρέβαν	"emphatic" aor., which portraits an action as fixed and already passed in the speech act of the actual utterance: Davis quoting Kannicht ad E. Hel 330, Moorhouse pp. 195-6. Pace Kam, it is a typical choral praeteritio, very frequent with the Priamel in praise poetry.

503	τίνες	supplied by Herman, with question mark at the end of the sentence. This makes excellent sense and provide the stanza with a very typical feature of choral poetry: (rhetoric) questions about the content and the celebrated exploit.

503	ἐπὶ	"il κατέβαν è tecnico (cf. LSJ s.v. 1.3) e così anche ἐπὶ", Longo. In agonistic context it indicates what one of participant descend into the context field for (the kind of context, or his purpose): this is a context to win a bride. The expression is further stressed by πρὸ γάμων (= nuptiarum causa, not prae nuptiis, as Kam reads it).

504	ἀμφίγυοι	an old and probably only vaguely understood word already in Homer. Here its exact meaning is disputed since the Antiquity, with the Schol recording no less than 4 interpretations. Note the usual "condensed" form of the Greek question: "who strong rivals came down to the battle field?", where we would say: "who were the massive rivals that entered the contest for her nuptials".

507	σθένος	the Hom. periphrasis with σθένος, βίη, ἴς are an an obvious model.

512	τόξα	plural, as often, the bow being composed of different parts assembled together (see Moorhouse).

513	ἀολλεῖς	in Homer typical of grouped mass that moves together; here, according to Schol, "abusively applied" (καταχρηστικῶς) to the two enemies converging together for a close fight; Longo suggests Il. 16.276 as a possible model (where Τρώεσσιν ἀολλέες are side by side and could be taken together by a reader).

514	μόνα	predicative, not with ξυνοῦσα, but with ῥαβδονόμει: she was the sole judge.

514	εὔλεκτρος	common type of epithets of the gods: εὐ + one attribute of their power; always polyvalent (pointing at the gift that Gods donate generously, or to the ornament that they display with great beauty, etc.: Longo). "The usage is causal" (Kam), quoting Ph. 829 and OC 1600, and attributive.

516	ξυνοῦσα	not quite pleonastic (Longo), as many participles in sentence end are; ξυνοῦσα is a word which is very dear to Sophocles: it stress the presence of the goddess and goes with the main verb

520	ἦν	the so-called "schema Pindaricum" (K-G 1.68-9): the singular verb precedes, followed by a plural sbj.; here it is probably influenced by the intention not to break the anaphora of ἦν.

520	κλίμακες	"wrestler's trick" (LSJ sv. III), κλῖμαξ· πάλης εἶδος, Hesychios

524	"τηλαυγεῖ, ‘seen afar,’ ‘distant’: Theog. 550 “ἀπὸ τηλαυγέος φαινόμενος σκοπιῆς”: Nub. 281 “τηλεφανεῖς σκοπιάς”: cp. “τηλωπός” (n. on Ph.216).—Others take it actively, ‘seeing (=giving a view) from afar’ (cp. “τηλεσκόπος”). Diod.1. 50 has this use: “τῆς χώρας αὐτοῖς συνεργούσης πρὸς τὸ τηλαυγέστερον ὁρᾶν”. But it seems less probable here." (Jebb)

526	μαργᾷ	ἐγὼ δὲ μάτηρ MSS, Jebb (among the many) ἀγὼν δὲ μαργᾷ, a conjecture rightly regarded by Kam as "unworthy of his author"; alii alia, and perhaps the best solution is reading θατήρ (= dor. for θεατής) with Zielinsky. The attempted defenses of the transmitted text are dismissed by Jebb with all due argument (and see Davis against their recent revival).

526	ἀγὼν see above 526 μαργᾷ

527	"ὄμμα, in periphrasis, is sometimes little more than ‘form,’ ( Eur. Ion1261“ὦ ταυρόμορφον ὄμμα Κηφισοῦ πατρός”:) but here it refers specially to her anxious gaze: cp. Soph. Ai.139“πεφόβημαι” | “πτηνῆς ὡς ὄμμα πελείας”" (Jebb)

531	ἦμος	in the less common meaning of "while, so long as" (LSJ)

538	φρενός	most probably gen. object. with λωβητὸν "destroyer of my mind". Some take it with ἐμπόλημα, and would have the sentence mean: "a shameful price (received) for my (benevolent) attitude", which strains too much the meaning of the words.

542	οἰκούρια	"sc. δῶρα,  wages, reward for keeping the house" (LSJ)

543	νόσῳ	νοσεῖν with the instrumental/causal dat. (as in Aj. 207: θολερῷ χειμῶνι νοσήσας) instead of the more common internal obj. (νόσον νοσεῖν).

544	τὸ	the infinitive obj. of the verb is placed at the beginning of the sentence; the art. add further emphasis, conveyed in such translations as: "But as for living together with her, what woman could possibly?"

544	αὖ	reinforces the antithesis (Kam): see LSJ II.2

548	ὧν	should (logically) refere to the younger women, and thus the schol. took it to mean τῶν γυναικῶν; this is very difficult and yet it remains the only acceptable solution (East). Jebb reads it as a partitive genitive (= τῶν ἡβῶν), but this eliminates the clear parallelism between ὧν and τῶν (which echoes τὴν μέν... τὴν δέ); besides, ἄνθος cannot stand alone, but it surely needs to be specified by the genitive. Zippmann's solution (accepted by Ll-J&W; see Ll-J's translation) is no improvement at all and it is rightly rejected by Davis. Dawe supposes a lacuna.

550	ταῦτα	"for this reason, then: the pron. is adverbial: cp. Aesch Pers.159" (Jebb)

550	πόσις	here interestingly contrasted with ἀνήρ ("*my* husband, but *her* mate": East)

553	τῇδ᾽	as Longo notes, no interpreter (with the exception of Jebb and those, like Hermann, who deal away with the problem by altering this or other points of the text) little attention was paid to the correlation of ᾖ... τῇδε, which is quite obscure. More recently, 2 hypothesis have been advanced: 1. attraction of the demonstrative in the case of the rel pron:  τῇδε = τόδε (Moorhouse, p. 271, criticized by Davis, because no such attraction of the pron is attested) 2. Davis quotes the idiom τῇδε λέγειν, ὁρᾶν frequent in Plato. Either way, τῇδε seems to be idiomatically tied to the verb; on account also of the obj status of the subordinate rel., its seem best to annotate it as OBJ argument of the verb.

558	φονῶν	"blood shed by slaying" (LSJ II)

560	πόρευε	"c. dupl.acc., carry or ferry over" (LSJ); the prodelision of the syllabic augment is hardly needed, on account of the narrative style of D's account

560	ἐρέσσων	can be assumed to govern either: 1. πομπίμοις κώπαις alone, as a rather pleonastic addition 2. zeugmatically with λαίφεσιν νεώς as well.

563	στόλον	internal acc. with ἑσπόμην: "when I followed my father's sending"; active meaning ("act of στέλλειν, of sending"), whereas the passive is generally typical ("expedition sent").

564	ἦ	Dindorf, ἦν MSS, ἦ 'ν Dobree, on account of the fact that ἦ is the normal form for the 1st person. But the third person, as well as the simple dat., can stand as they are in the mss (whereas prodelision after ἦ is dubious: see Longo and bibliography quoted).

566	ἐπιστρέψας	intransitive = ἐπιστρέψας ὀπίσω; but see next note

566	χεροῖν	generally taken with ἧκεν; Longo, though, objects that 1. the enjambement is harsh 2. that the construction is very redundant and not perspicuous of the act of bow-shooting. He proposes to take χεροῖν with ἐπιστρέψας, with βέλη or τόξον as implied obj of the participle. But the enjambement can stand (see El. 1132, quoted by Longo himself) and the part is best taken as intransitive

573	σφαγῶν	either 1. with ἀμφίθρεπτον (governed by the verbal idea and the ἀμφί) 2. with ἐνέγκῃ (Campb) 3. with αἷμα (Kam). I favour 1

573	ᾗ	it is notoriously very difficult to make sense of this scene; the problem is further complicated by the strained meaning of βάπτειν (574	ἔβαψεν); two general interpretations are possible: 1. D has to take the blood from the wound (see Jebb paraphrasis: 'at the part (of the wound) where the monstrous hydra has tinged the arrow with black gall': i.e., 'where the hydra's gall, with which the arrow is tinged, can be traced'); 2. the blood must be collected from the arrow, dyed with the Hydra's blood (Kam). I have followed the interpretation of Jebb.

574	ἔβαψεν	strained or catachrestic if we conserve the arrows (ἰούς) has to be the object (Longo): here the Hydra is portrayed as "dipping the arrows in its own blood", so that the polarity is reversed (since, of course, it was Herakles who dipped the arrow). Davis quotes and aptly discuss the famous episode of dipping of the arrows in the tales of the enterprise. Ll-J&W and Davis accept Dobree's conjecture (see 574	ἰούς), which gives to the verb the more usual construction and meaning of "dye".

574	ἰούς	are the arrows of Herakles, dyed with the Hydra's blood. Ll-J&W prints Dobree's conjecture μελάγχολος ἰός (with ἰός = venom, this time) to be construed as apposition (kenning: Davis) with θρέμμα (= "the poison", with Long: see belove) and the wound as an implied obj (see Ll-J's translation).

574	θρέμμα	"the offspring of the Hydra", possibly "the (monstrous) creature of the (epeseg.) Hydra", interpreted by most as a sheer periphrasis for the Hydra itself. Long, supported by Longo, takes it to mean: "the venom", without altering ἰούς.

578	ἦν	parenthetical annotation introduced by γάρ

587	εἰ	εἰ δὲ μή = "otherwise", idiomatic and so after a negative protasis.

589	παρ᾽ ἡμῖν	"in our eyes. (properly 'before' a judge)", Kam. Cf. Eur. Med. 762: γενναῖος ἀνήρ, / Αἰγεῦ, παρ᾽ ἐμοὶ δεδόκησαι, quoted by Jebb.

597	αἰσχύνῃ	generally interpreted as a dat. of manner; bur rightly Longo takes it at as a proper dative, common with πίπτειν. Davis quotes Schwyzer 2.156.b

604	ὅπως	"The more usual infin. is often thus replaced after verbs of asking or commanding; but it is specially suitable, as here, after a verb of warning" (Jebb). Brachylogic, according to Longo: φράζε (σκοπεῖν) ὅπως μή etc

606	ὄψεταί	Inversion (as in 574): it's the sun that sees, and not the contrary as a plainer expression would put it (see translations). Longo recalls the contexts where the sun serves as witness, but they serve a different purpose.

607	μήτ᾽	strongly zeugmatic: the sun may be depicted as watching over a scene, but the image becomes more difficult as the other elements of the coordination are added (the precinct of the sanctuary, the blaze of the altar light).

607	ἔφεστιον	"fire 'at the hearth', presumably indoor" (East, and so everybody). But Ll-J: "the blaze at the altar"

608	ἐμφανῶς	*may* logically belong to the verb (so Kam), but the word order and the paranomastic play leads a reader to construct it, rather emphatically, with σταθεὶς (Jebb).

610	ηὔγμην	generally taken as pluperfect (e.g. Moorhouse p. 201, Kam: "voveram"). But Davis strongly argues for an athematic form of aorist and he may be right

611	πανδίκως	can be taken either with: 1. κλύοιμι (Kam, Dawe, East: "reliably", A. Se 171); 2. with στελεῖν (Jebb, Ll-J); 3. with σωθέντα (schol). Punctuation of our text presupposes n.1.

612	στελεῖν	"furnish with, array in" LSJ

615	σφραγῖδος ἕρκει	"the circle of my seal" (LSJ), ἕρκος = 'ring', + gen. epeseg.; or maybe liklier with Jebb: "The word “ἕρκος”, ‘enclosure,’ means the part of the ring which bears the device".

615	ἐπὸν	Billerbeck, ἐπ' ὄμμα θήσεται MSS; Kam try to maintain the vulgate. But the conjecture is a clear improvement.

615	μαθήσεται	is most easily construed with the part pred (ἐπὸν); ἐπὸν, in its turn, should govern σφραγῖδος ἕρκει: Herakles will recognize easily that the token (σῆμα) is the one that stands upon D's ring; Jebb representation of the obj (with the bezel that is *upon* the ring of the σφραγίς) is altogether convincing. εὐμαθὲς goes, predicatively, with the obj. of the sentence, (ὅ = τὸ σῆμα)

618	ὅπως	variation in the series πρῶτα μέν... ἔπειτα

620	τέχνην	internal acc

621	ἐν	"in thy business" (LSJ), "in your case" (East), "when I do so for you" (Ll-J); "in what concerns you (compare in with abl. in Latin), almost erga te" (Kam), and this seems certainly better.

625	ὡς	here it introduces the ind. question and depends on ἔχοντα in the peculiar idiom ἔχειν + modal adv = be in a certain condition ("how things are in the house"). As in the PDT guidelines ὡς is annotated: 1. AuxY = 'as' and with participles and gen. abs.; 2. ADV with the verb when it introduces an indirect question ('how) 3. AuxC when: a. it is a declarative or a consecutive subordinate b. when it introduces a comparison

630	γ᾽	stressing ἄλλος in sentences like "what *else*?", "nothing *else*", Denniston 121.

633	ναύλοχα	can be either: 1. coordinated with πετραῖα, both being epithets of θερμὰ λουτρὰ (LSJ, Jebb, Kam, East) 2. noun: "the harbour" (Ellendt, Davis and Longo dubitanter, Ll-J). Davis recalls (from Cambp's Essay p. 36) Soph' tendency of using adj's as substantives. But the sentence balance, as Kam says, favors n. 2.

642	ἀχῶν	from ἠχέω (Jebb and East), for the ametrical ἰάχων dei MSS; it is not clear whether Davis and Ll-J takes it as a different form (gen of ἄχος or ἠχή with ἐπάνεισιν transitive?).

644	κόρος	"objection has been taken to the double gen., but needlessly: the second gen. practically forms a single notion with “κόρος”,—‘Zeus's Alcmena-son,’=the son of Zeus by Alcmena. To a Greek ear the effect would be nearly the same as when the first gen. is replaced by an adj." (Jebb); note that the τε between the gen. is omitted by Triclinius.

650	οἱ	dat. of possession, and this seems favored by the word order. Longo (who also argues that φίλα does not mean "his dear wife", Jebb, but has the possessive meaning frequent in Homer) would take it rather as ethic dat with ὤλλυτο

655	αὐτῷ	not clear, yet not discussed by any commentator: either possessive (may he not stop his ὄχημα) or ethic/interest with the verb

660	μόλοι	the passage is desperately corrupt. Jebb's restauration is one of the possible guesswork.

660	πανίμερος	vulgate πανάμερος can be perfectly acceptable, if we take it to be a derivation from ἥερος, and not from ἡμέρα: so the Schol. (most likely), Kam, Longo and Davis dubitanter


662	προφάσει	surely corrupt, pace Jebb: every explanation is untenable (see Davis and Stinton)

662	φάρους MSS θηρὸς: on account of the mention of Persuasion, I think that a mention of the Centaur would be needed.

666	εἰ	with verbs of fear: cf. 176	εἴ

668	τι	"is acc. of respect, and the gen. depends on it: ‘Surely thou art not anxious as to aught belonging to, concerning thy gift?" (Jebb)

673	ὑμᾶς	by Blaydes (ὑμῖν MSS) is supposed to ease the syntax. But οἷον cannot be = ὥστε and Jebb's paraphrase is very misleading. The nominal sentence with the transmitted text gives a much smoother construction: see Davis. If we accept Jebb's text then we must take θαῦμ᾽ ἀνέλπιστον as a predicative of οἷον ("such as you will learn as an unexpected wonder"). But this surely worse than the transmitted text.

675	ἀργής	Bergk, MSS ἀργῆτ' = ἀργῆτι with the transmitted πόκῳ, elision of a dative which is not admitted for Attic. Acc. (ἀργῆτα epithet of πέπλον) is defended by Kam, but it is indeed very week. Blaydes: ἀργῆς οἰὸς εὐέρου πόκῳ, which is accepted by Ll-J

675	πόκος	the transm. dative would be in apposition with the relative ("The thing with which I lately rubbed the robe he was to put on, the wholly fleece of a white sheep" Ll-J, with Blaydes' text).

678	ψῇ	normally "rub", "whipe"; but here it must be intransitive: "crumble away". This has troubled many editors

678	κατ᾽	difficult and possibly corrupt. σπιλάς = (at the plural) "pointed rocks", a puzzling word in this context. Taken by the schol to mean a slab to which the piece of wool was positioned; the phrase thus should mean something like "down from the top of a stone slab" (thus Ll-J). Mazon (approved by Kam) takes it to mean "the soil": "étalé sur le sol" (Kam adds: "à la surface du dallage". None of these is very convincing, and the schol's solution is very weak.

680	ὧν	either masc or neut (see οὐδέν); masc is more probable: ἐκείνων ἅ... θεσμῶν

682	οὐδέν	changed to οὐδέν' (masc.: οὐδένα) by some; this is unwise, also because Soph knew a plur. θεσμά. But here it is very easy to take it as a partitive gen. ad sensum: "nothing of the prescription".

684	καὶ	comparation compendiaria: "et... et" for "ut... ita"; the line was deleted by Wunder, probant Ll-J et Davis; contra see Jebb and Easterling. The chief problem is the syntax ("rather loose" according to Kam): what governs the inf. σῴζειν?

684	τάδ᾽	it can look either forward (this = what follows) or backward, like τοιαῦτα

692	κἄθηκα	with the dat. LSJ I c (ἐν omitted)

688	ἐργαστέον	periphrastic, comparable with the Latin type of passive obligation (Carthago delenda est). Yet in Greek, the construction of verbal adjectives in -τέος + "auxiliary" εἰμί is most often concurrence with the nominal sentence; this point rather to an assimilation of this construction to the nominal predicate (+ eventual copula) than to a grammaticalization of a periphrasis. Therefore, it is annotated as copula + PNOM. 

689	κατ᾽ κατ᾽ οἶκον, as opposed to outside the palace.

689	ἐν	ἐν δόμοις: in a inner room, especially the women's quarter; but the sequence οἶκον / δόμοις, which are typically used synonymically to provide variation in different periods, is quite redundant.

693	εἴσω	"εἴσω δ᾽ ἀποστείχουσα, returning into the house (632). The words “ὥσπερ εἴδετε” indicate the previous dialogue in front of it (531—632)" (Jebb). ἔξω by Ll-J ('and when I was going out') is worse than pointless.

696	φλόγα	very difficult: it cannot mean anything but "en plein soleil" (cf. Sen, Herc. Oet. 725: 'medios in ignes solis'), but the gen. ἡλίου is surely needed. It may very well be possible that this verse is interpolated.

701	ὅθεν	= ὅπου by attraction of ἐκ γῆς

704	ἀπ᾽	construed with: 1. ὀπώρας 2. ποτοῦ 3. χυθέντος. Solution n. 2, although perhaps less logical (Jebb), is still syntactically the easiest.

706	μ᾽	personal instead of reflexive (ἐμαυτήν): see Jebb for a good explanation

516	ἐκ	governing σφαγῶν and, on its turn, governed by διελθὼν; others take it with τοῦδ neuter (= "nachrede"); but the proposed solution is made more probable by line 572 (Kam)

717	ἰὸς	the ambiguity of the word (poison vs arrow) contributes here to the obscurity of the text

734	εἱλόμην	is most easily constructed with ἐκ τριῶν... ἓν as object (but see on σ᾽), with the coordinated clauses as apposition to τριῶν ("how I wish I could choose one of these 3 things, (i.e.) either that...or that...or that..."). Jebb takes it to govern the three verbs, with ἓν apposition to the whole sentence ("how I wish that..., or that..., or that, one of (these) three options), but this is less likely.

734	σ'	it's the subject of the three infinitives, anticipated with great emphasis (and slightly "perturbing" the syntactic flow)

737	τῶνδ᾽	obj. with ἀμείψασθαί, since the gen. of exchange is grammatically needed; but the association with λῴους as a complement of comparison is also very compelling (so Mazon's translation).

738	πρός	the sentence is boldly and carefully constructed: logically, πρός introduces an attributive complement with τί ("what is it that, coming by me, is so hateful"); with the passive participle it would only mean: "what is it that it is hated by me", which is absurd. Longo very convincingly explains the structure as mixing three possible developments: 1. what is happening, τί δ᾽ ἐστίν 2. what have I done (i.e. what was don by me) 3. what is it so hateful, that I have done.

742	ἂν	See Goodwin 223 on repeated ἂν: it can be used "in order to emphasise particular words with which ἄν is joined, and to make them prominent as being affected by the contingency"

752	ἀκτή	note the sudden (and lively) change of sbj; interpreters compare E. Hipp 1198

754	φυλλάδα	Heracles 

756	πολυθύτους compound epithet, the second half of which (the nominal part) is almost a synonym of the subst. (σφαγὰς): see Jebb for other examples.

760	προυξεφίεσο	imperf. as often with verb of command (ἐκέλευον), stressing the continuing and long process of instruction.

760	ἔχων	left unexplained by most interpreter and translator, or glossed as "redundant" (Kam); But Longo is probably right in considering it as governing ἀπαρχήν, as if it were βοῦς οὓς εἶχεν ὡς λείας ἀπαρχήν (OBJ/ATV)

761	βοῦς	it is impossible to decide whether cows (fem) or bulls (masc) are meant. The governing ταυροκτονεῖ is not as decisive as one might think (see Jebb), but it still a possible clue.

761	ἀτὰρ	progressing from the previous μέν, with weak adversative force.

763	δείλαιος	anticipating comment, which weights especially on κόσμῳ τε χαίρων καὶ στολῇ, here serving alone as a sbj of the sentence.

765	ὀργίων	different constructions are possible for this gen and κἀπὸ πιείρας: 1. ablatival gen. with ἐδαίετο (Campb, Longo) 2. gen. of origin with φλόξ (Jebb, Ll-J) 3. take ὀργίων with φλόξ and provide another construction for κἀπὸ πιείρας (see below). N. 1 is adopted here.

766	κἀπὸ	typically coordinated with ὀργίων; but others prefers to join it with αἱματηρὰ, as if = ἀπὸ τοῦ αἵματος τῶν σφαγίων κἀπὸ δρυός (Kam, East). (Note that in the annotation of the crasis the preposition was singled out, because the variation gen. simplex / preposition is here clearly relevant).

768	τέκτονος	as Longo writes, the similitude is just hinted and not fully displayed; its meaning is notoriously difficult to assess. Syntactically, with the transmitted text (Davis prefers to read ὡς ἐκ τέκτονος), the genitive can only be subjective: "as a chiton that an artist has made".

770	ὀστέων	a "loose genitive", according to Longo; it can be joined with: 1. ἀντίσπαστος ("taking hold of", Kam who compares ἀνθήψατο, 778; "tearing at his bones" Ll-J) 2. with ἦλθε as if = δι' ὀστέων (suggested by Kam) 3. with ἀδαγμὸς (ἀντίσπαστος = "spasmodic", "convulsive", LSJ). The choice is difficult (n.3 adopted).

771	ὣς	see 118 ὥσπερ for the annotation

772	βόησε	= βοῶν ἠρώτησε (Jebb), constructed with acc. of the person to which somebody shout at and with int. question.

775	δώρημ᾽	an object verb must be mentally supplied: εἶναι or ἐνεγκεῖν are the most likely candidate. The following clause, ὥσπερ ἦν ἐσταλμένον ('as it was sent', sc. by the donor, or possibly 'as it made ready to be sent') would require  ἐνεγκεῖν. Longo rightly notes a tone of lively rushing in the elliptical sentence.

776	ἦν	the periphrasis with the perfect part = "as it was in the state of having been prepared"

779	μάρψας	typical construction of the whole and part, frequent with body parts (gen. partis, partitive genitive)

780	ῥιπτεῖ	from ῥιπτέω, changed by Elmsley to the simplex ῥίπτει;  the form of the derivative are conserved sporadically by the mss (see Ellendt). See Jebb at Aj. 239-41

780	ἐκ	taken with: 1. ἀμφίκλυστον by the Schol. (= ἐκ πόντου κλυζομένην, 'washed on both sides by the sea') 2. πέτραν as attribute (= '(rising) from the sea'); this last one is perhaps the easiest construction.

781	μέσου	conveniently explained by Longo on the analogy of the structures like μέσον διαρραγῆναι = "cleave in halves" (cf. also Il. 16.411). Two ideas are blurred and condensed in the expression: 1. the skull split asunder in the middle 2. the skull's fragments being disseminated around

782	κρατὸς	neut or masc?

783	ἀνηυφήμησεν	a "blasphemous paradox": see Fraenkel on Ag. 645

786	καὶ	variation in the coordinated complement: adverb / predicative adj

789	ἀπεῖπε	1. constructed with the participles (Jebb, Kam) 2. absolute (Longo, Ll-J and cf. LSJ s.v. ἀπεῖπον: 'sink from exhaustion'). The first is perhaps preferable, because n.2 seems somewhat less logical: how can Heracles 'sink from exhaustion' and still hurl himself to the ground many times?

791	ἐνδατούμενος, whatever construction we accept for ῥίπτων and βοῶν, it is best to take it as specifying βοῶν (Easterling), than with the main verb (Jebb).

804	σφε can be taken with: 1. θέντες (ἐκέλσαμεν = intr.: see below) 2. with ἐκέλσαμεν (Easterling) 3. ἀπὸ κοινοῦ (Jebb). Yet βρυχώμενον cannot be easily split from ἐκέλσαμεν (Longo) so n. 2 is preferable

804	ἐκέλσαμεν	intr. according to LSJ; νῆα is usually the only obj. governed by the verb. Yet, see on σφε

806	ἐσόψεσθ᾽	not quite the usual construction with predicative participle ("you will watch him living or dying")

817	ἄλλως	vainly, surely with τρέφειν

817	τρέφειν	"‘keep,’ continue to enjoy" (Jebb). Schol (taken up by Ellendt) see in it a mere synonym of ἔχειν; quite rightly Kam opposes this view.

821	"ἴδ': though several persons are addressed, the sing. is used (as in O.C. 1463), since “ἰδέ” could be a mere interjection" (Jebb); K-G I 84.4 α.

821	οἷον	interpreted as: 1. 'epic' adverb constructed with ἄφαρ (Jebb, Easterling, Ll-J: "how swiftly there has come upon us...") 2. predicative adj. agreeing with τοὔπος (Ellendt, Campbell, Kamerbeek): "in what fashion" or "what is the nature of the divine word that has swiftly come upon us", conveying, as Ellendt writes, a note of wander or indignation. N. 2 is clearly superior both for meaning and grammar.

821	προσέμειξεν	intr., "came suddenly upon us" (LSJ). Longo collects a few places where the oracles are said "to come" to people; but he rightly notes that here the meaning is more of hostility (LSJ transl. is right).

822	ἡμῖν	not feminine, rather more general encompassing the whole house of Hercles

824	ὅ	Hermann (taken up by Davis) would like to make a θεός implicit in θεοπρόπον the antecedent of it, rather than ἔπος; but this is quite unnecessary: the divine word is quite capable of uttering its revelation (see Longo) 

824	τ᾽	epic τε with relative

825	τελεῖν	likely a future, rather than a present; = "bring to its final fulfillment", with ἀναδοχὰν = 'the succession of labours' (I fail to see why this meaning for the obj would imply τελεῖν = παύειν, as Longo thinks). It can be both intransitive (with ἀναδοχάν as sbj) or transitive (with ἄροτος implied from the previous sentence as sbj and ἀναδοχάν = obj); but the first solution is much less probable: see Jebb.

826	καὶ	and indeed (Kam)

826	κατουρίζει	hapax; is it intr. or trans (with the oracle as implied sbj)? The majority of the interpr. are for intr. (only LSJ suggests trans. as the favourite option).

829	πόνων	added by Gleditsch, to restore responsion with the antistrophe. But the majority of editors prefers to delete Νέσσου θ' in the antistrophe with Erfurdt, and this seems indeed to be very possible. But the reading of 838 is more difficult than it is usually thought.

831	νεφέλᾳ	"dat. of circumstance, ‘with a cloud of death around him’" (Jebb). But this is a notoriously difficult metaphor; and truly, the meaning "net" is well attested and possible.

833	πλευρά	acc. of the part (with σφε being the acc of the whole), governed by χρίει; others (Kam) make it internal obj with προστακέντος, which is also possible.

834	ἔτρεφε	Lobeck, ἔτεκε MSS; there are no serious objections in interpreting the change of voice with Hermann ('genuit... peperit'; cf. Ll-J's translation: "whose mother was the darting snake, and whose begetter was Death"), so that the transmitted text should be kept.

838	μελαγχαίτα	genitive. On the metrical problems see on 829. Erfurdt's solution of deleting Νέσσου is frequently accepted and indeed the name is a likely candidate as intruding gloss. But μελαγχαίτα without article as periphrasis to the Centaur is very hard; one has the impression that at 838 "μελαγχαίτα nomen desiderat" (Dawe); so we may as well retain Jebb's text without modifications.

841	ὧν	we do not need to look for an immediate antecedent in this or the previous sentence. The whole stasimon has so far explained how Nessos' venom was about to bring H's destiny to fulfillment; "of (all) this" D is unaware, so that the antecedent is the content of the two preceding stanzas.

841	ἄοκνος	Musgrave, ἄοκνον codd. The conjecture is sure.

842	προορῶσα	Blaydes, προσορῶσα MSS, but the transmitted text makes a perfect sense, and even a better one: as Jebb states, "Deianeira had seen Iolè's arrival. She did not merely ‘foresee’ evil; she had ‘beheld’ it coming".

843	ἀΐσσουσαν	Nauck, ἀισσόντων MSS, which could also be acceptable

843	αὐτὰ	Blaydes, οὐ τι codd, defended by Kam. Yet all defence of the vulgate is undermined by the very forced meaning that is required for προσβάλλειν ("understand" the Schol., "not help to bring to pass" Campb.). 

852	κέχυται	the text of the mss is deeply corrupted, as can be seen from the metre: Jebb prints the mss text between daggers and suggest some supplements which, although not all entirely convincing, are a good solution for sense and metre.

853	ἀναρσίων	Jebb's conjecture (ἀναρσίων <ὑπ'> οὔπω) is here convincing, since it provides good ground to explain the corrupted paradosis and a good construction for ἀναρσίων.

854	Ἡρακλέους	codd, expunxit Dindorf, followed by almost all the editors (with the exception of Kam); it is a likely candidate indeed. 

854	ἀγακλειτὸν	Jebb would read <τοῦδε σῶμ'> ἀγακλειτὸν, thus referring the adjective to the hero; this is very plausible but far less appealing than taking ἀγακλειτὸν with πάθος (as Kam does).

856	προμάχου	taken to mean: 1. 'fighting in the front of battle' (Jebb). 2. 'defending', Ll-J, i.e. 'who once fought on behalf of men (against monster)'.

857	θοὰν	'here is merely adverbial, =“ταχέως”' (Jebb)

859	αἰχμᾷ	"war-like spirit" (LSJ sv III); here thus "prowess", dat. of instrument (note that the sbj, via the relative pronoun, is λόγχα δορός: so that the expression is very emphatic and redundant).

866	καινίζει	ἔοικέ τι νεώτερον ἔχειν ὁ οἶκος, Schol.

867	ἀλλά	the coordination may be taken to: 1. link two attributes of κωκυτόν (cf. e.g. Ll-J's translation) 2. anticipate ἄσημον as a neuter internal obj. which is then completed by δυστυχῆ κωκυτόν (Jebb, Kam, Longo, and apparently Davies). N. 2 is more poignant.

867	στέγη	can theoretically be either nom sg. from στέγη or neut. plur from στέγος: both are attested in Soph., but the second is much rarer

869	τήνδ᾽	same construction of sbj of the subordinate anticipated as obj. of the main verb

869	κατηφὴς	Blaydes, ἀήθης MSS, which is corrected because "not showing her usual ἦθος" is not at all clear. Note that κατηφὴς is not quite the reading of Jebb! He prints the transmitted text between daggers and favours ἀγηθής. Again, whose text am I reading? (The answer is: Storr's old Loeb)


878	ὀλεθρία	so MSS. Ll-J&W print Blaydes' conjecture τάλαιν᾽· ὀλέθρου τίνι τρόπῳ. Kam reads ὀλέθρια, sc. κλύω. But see Longo: Ai. 403 gives an excellent parallel to this adj.

879	σχετλιώτατα	thus Smith and Jebb, transposing γε from the transmitted σχετλιώτατά πρὸς γε; but the text is still not fully convincing. Ll-J&W print Hermann's σχετλίῳ τὰ πρὸς γε πρᾶξιν.

884	πως	Storr prints it without accent, but quite inexplicably; it should be change to πῶς.

896	μᾶλλον	the construction with the following κάρτ᾽ is dubious

898	τις	"a woman's hand"; we would have said: 'the hand of a woman'

899	δ᾽	"post quaestionem vel exclamationem" (Italie II.11)

905	γένοιντ᾽	sc. οἱ βωμοί: "Naturally the altars come first; when they were forsaken, the family life would have ceased" (Jebb).

905	ἐρῆμοι	Nauck, ἐρήμη MSS; the conjecture is clearly an improvement: as Jebb says, D is saying farewell to her palace.

905	κλαιε	is the augment needed or not? Davis strongly advocates it, quoting Bergson, Eranos (1953): 127, on account of the fact that unaugmented forms are regular only at the beginning of a line but not allowed in the middle. Prodelision is very dubious after -οι, so this should also entails the conservation of the transmitted ἐρήμη. All the other editors suppress it (except Storr), but one may wonder (at least in the case of Ll-J) whether this is on account of Nauck's conjecture.

905	ὅτου	"ὅστις occurs as an equivalent of εἴ τις" (Moorhouse, 264). Cf. K-G II 427.

906	ψαύσειεν	opt. of repeated actions in a past series: Goodwin 532. Well rendered by Jebb: "whenever she touched any household thing that she, poor lady, had habitually used in the past, her tears would flow".

911	οὐσίας	very likely, the line hides a corruption in the phrase ἄπαιδας... οὐσίας. οὐσίας is indeed very difficult: 1. its concrete meaning ("wealth") is considered impossible in high poetry (Davis, who quotes Kannicht on E. Hel. 1253) 2. the meaning "existence" (Campb, Kam) is very hard and almost illogical in the view of the opposition implied with Deianeira's own fate. No satisfactory solution has been proposed: Dindorf's deletion (Ll-J&W) is a mere escape out of difficulties. οὐσίας in sense 1 at least yields an acceptable meaning (so rightly Longo).

914	κἀγὼ	Diggle's objections to this καί (recorded in Davis addenda ad 911) don't seem very justified. True, the Nurse was already the subject of the previous verb; but the last action mentioned was the departure of Deianeira (told with acc and part pred governed by ὁρῶ).

914	λαθραῖον	"acc. of respect: ἐπεσκιασμένη, ‘overshadowed,’ i.e., ‘shrouded from view.’ Thus the phrase means strictly, ‘shrouded as to (or in) my secret observation’" (Jebb)

916	βάλλουσαν with dat., in the sense of “ἐμ-” or “ἐπιβάλλουσαν” (Jebb)

926	προύκειτο	"was projecting from her breast": see Stinton 141

926	εὐώνυμον	"euphem. (like ἀριστερός) for left" (LSJ III)

928	τεχνωμένης	a puzzling genitive; 1. some take it with παιδί (Cambp, Jebb, East), but the construction is clumsy indeed 2. with the verb as gen. of argument (Davis who quotes KG II I 363 c, Kam, Longo partially); with 2, the verb φράζειν lacks an obj at the acc, so that some suggested to take τάδε with it; yet this is certainly not possible.

934	οὔνεκα	"like ὅτι, that, i.e. the fact that" (LSJ I.3)

937	ἐλείπετο	zeugmatic, with: 1. gen. (= "fail in"); 2. part pred (almost like ἐπαύετο), Kamerbeek.

938	στόμασιν	not instrumental, but with ἀμφιπίπτων: cf. E. Alc. 403.

938	πλευρόθεν	formally, it is an adv. denoting origin; Davis notes the irregular derivation, since feminine adv in -θεν should be formed in -άθεν. Spatially, it should define the starting point: "from the side", thus "at the side". It is taken by all the commentators with παρείς

941	ἐκ	taken to be: 1. of origin: 'on the part of both parents' 2. of agent (Kamerbee): as if it was ὑπό; εἶς by Nauck "removes an awkwardness and makes a point that is telling in the context" according to Ll-J&W (approved by Davis). Indeed, the juxtaposition of numerals is frequent for pathetic effects; moreover, the context seems really to require the meaning: 'deprived of both parents', which would be much easier with the simple genitive. Davis also points to Ll-J's conjecture at Ai. 630, which is slightly different, though.

942	βίον	Wakefield, βίου codd; acc. of respect. The correction seems quite necessary, since the gen. could only mean 'deprived of life' (which is defended by Longo, but seems out of point).

944	τι	Dindorf; ἢ καὶ πλείους τις MSS. Note that West conjectured κἀπὶ πλείους (accepted by Ll-J&W and Davis), which change the construction of λογίζεται (the preposition goes with both acc).

947	πρότερον	Dindorf, ποτερ' ἂν πρότερα MSS and the correction is inescapable. All editors note how frequent this parechesis is (Davis has a good note; he quotes Fraenkel's note on Ag. 268 for aliteration of π as conveying 'breathless excitement').

947	,	it is better, as Jebb does, to put comma instead of question mark: it is difficult for the Ch to judge what toil to bewail first, etc.

948	μέλεα	Musgrave, τέλεα mss, which is difficult (if not impossible) to defend, pace Kam and Longo (see Jebb); see also the Schol.

951	μένομεν	Erfurdt, μέλλομεν MSS; Hermann (followed by Campbell) conjectured μελόμν' (scil. ἐστίν). But Erfurdt's emendation yields a better structure for the verse, and the verb suits better ἐπ' ἐλπίσιν

951	ἐπ᾽	cf. Thuc. 6.31.6, E. HF 804 (Longo), where ἐλπίς is qualified: the meaning is modal.

959	Δῖον	Nauck, Διὸς MSS to be corrected metri causa; and note that Jebb reads Ζηνὸς with the Triclinian mss (once again, the text is Storr).

954	ἔπουρος	γένοιτο needs a predicative (an existential meaning seems less apt), and ἔπουρος seems the best candidate: ἔπουρος γένοιτο = ἐπουρίζει, as in all translations

958	μοῦνον	"al solo vederlo" (Longo); = AuxY with the participle

960	ἐν	the construction for the circumstantial complement is strange without a "verbal support" (thus Longo) that would covey the idea of "being/standing in the midst of troubles".

960	πρὸ	"χωρεῖν πρὸ δόμων, advancing (so as to come) in front of the house" (Jebb), cf. Moorhouse 93 and Longo's good note

961	θαῦμα	considered acc. in apposition to the sentence (or to ist verb alone, χωρεῖν in this case); ATR is the selected tag for the annotation in those cases; Ll-J reads θέαμα with Schekl, instead of τι θαῦμα

962	δ᾽	with ἄρα is not frequent in Attic.

962	προύκλαιον	the scholia took the verb as a 3rd person and glossed it ἀντὶ τοῦ προκλαίουσι, adding that the Chorus perceives now the coming of Herakles, escorted by a crowd of mourners. This is manifestly absurd, not only because of the ἄψοφον βάσιν that follows (so rightly Hermann), but especially on account of the equivalence pres/imperfect that is implied. After rejecting it, Hermann explains: "breviter dicit ἀγχοῦ κοὐ μακρὰν pro ἀγχοῦ ὄντα". This interpretations is widely adopted today: "it seems that the woe presaged by our voice is (even) closer at hand than we knew" (Jebb). Ad Ph. 26, Jebb has a good note on adverbs used as predicate, and that interpretations suits Ph. 26 very well. But here (as Jebb itself admits) the construction is much bolder: we do lack an object that can go with the verb and that can be joined with the two adv.'s. Nothing in προύκλαιον ('mourn in advance') can imply it. S. fr. 210.38-9 , ἀγχοῦ προσεῖπας (sc. τὸν δαίμονα), quoted by Davis, is again not quite the same, since the προσ- there gives a sense of direction (cf. the other fragment of Soph.), so that it is easier to imagine someone as "addressing near, i.e. the vicinity", even without supplying the obj. Others solutions adopted for our case are: 1. to supply οὖσα mentally and take ἀγχοῦ κοὐ μακρὰν adverbially with the verb (Kam) 2. to imagine that κοὐ μακρὰν προύκλαιον is of time ('I was not bewailing in advance for a long time') with ἀγχοῦ in a much looser construction (Longo; and cf. Campbell: "the word (sc. προύκλαιον) suits more exactly with μακράν than with ἀγχοῦ"). Both are not very convincing. The construction is brachylogic indeed. The expression "And so I was bewailing in premonition near and not far off (either in space or time)" can only be constructed as Cambpell and Longo propose, with the two adverbs taken with the verb as circumstantials.

972	ἐγὼ	construction of the exclamative, with gen. of the person on account of which the lamentation is addressed; since οἴμοι is taken as AuxZ, the ADV is linked with the pron. Note that the MSS text is generally altered on metrical as  grounds by modern edds (see Jebb's note).

973	μήσομαι	fut. ind. with deliberative subjunctive (πάθω); see Friis-Johansen & Wittle ad A. Su. 777

974	κινήσῃς	could be taken as: 1. coordinated negative imperative 2. negative final: "so that you don't rouse the savage pain etc" (Campbell). First seems more obvious.

976	προπετής	semantically suspended between a litteral representation ("lying down") and a more figurative one ("prostrate (by his doom)"); the first is predominant of account of γάρ, but the second cannot be ruled out of the context (Longo). ATvV in any case with the verb

976	ἴσχε	two constructions are fused: ἴσχειν στόμα and δάκνειν (στόμα), see Longo; so that the acc. is somewhat governend by both verbs.

978	μὴ	on οὐ μὴ, Davis quotes Moorhouse, pp. 337-8, who reads the construction as an emphatic prohibition, versus the question interpretation of Pearson. Davis refers the strong prohibitive interpretation to Elmsley (ad E. Med. 1151 (1120)) and quotes also Hermann, Opuscula iii.235.

983	ἐμμέμονεν	note the asyndeton. Others (starting from the Schol., and see Campbell) doesn't put a full stop before it; they construe the verb with internal obj. and ἐπί μοι. But this is very hard and the alternative is better.

987	ἡ	personification of the malady

988	ἐξῄδη	Wecklein, ἐξῄδης MSS, which is not acceptable. One may note, though, that the 2nd person was read by the schol., which explained it as ἆρ' ἔγνως ('did you fully understand') and this explanation is accepted by Wilamowitz; that would require Cobet's correction ἐξῄδησθ.

988	σ᾽	note the position: it is the subject of the verb, yet it is attached directly to the verb, as if a construction with the participle were to follow (S. OC. 1028).

989	κεύθειν	1. intr., according to some (Campbell: "to remain shrouded in silence"; Ll-J: "to keep silent") 2. transitive with implied obj. (Kam, Longo)

990	τῷδ᾽	dat. of possession (cf. Jebb's translation: "scattering sleep from his brain and eyes") or verbal (dat. incommodi)?

994	κρηπὶς	κρηπὶς βωμῶν could be taken as: 1. simple periphrasis to βωμοί (Kam) 2. allocution to the Cenaeum as the "foundation" of H's altars (cf. S. Ai. 860), Jebb, Longo

994	ἱερῶν	gen, pretii

995	Ζεῦ	editors prints a comma before ὦ Ζεῦ or period (so Cmpb). But Storr can be right in punctuating thus. After ἀνύσω the invocation would be a pure exclamation in any case, whereas the junction with the ἔθου-clause is prevented by the ἄρα.

996	οἵαν	PDT has its own tag for words repeated for the sake of emphasis. AGDT uses AuxY tag. Typically it is the first word that takes the tag, but it would be better to use it for the repeated word, i.e. the word that does not have the proper construction (in this case, the second οἵαν)

996	ἔθου	constructed in two different ways: 1. ἔθου με λώβαν=“ἐλωβήσω με”, with periphrastic use of τιθέναι and double acc 2. predicative, with λώβαν (OCOMP) = "object d'opprobre" (Mazon, and so Kam)

1000	ἀοιδός	the structure is brilliantly explained by Hermann (and see Kamerbeek): "incipit poeta, ut si dicturus sit τίς ἀοιδὸς κατακηλήσει, tum mutata scriptura pergit τίς ὁ χειροτέχνης ἰατορίας, ὃς κατακηλήσει". This is better than the "idiomatic" explanation supposed by Davis. Longo also notes the zeugmatic use of κατακηλήσει which adheres much closer to ἀοιδός than to χειροτέχνης.

1004	ἐᾶτέ	Jebb and Storr follow Hermann and, ultimately, Seidler in reconstructing a very complex strophic pattern. This requires in any case some important changes in the transmitted text and cannot be said to be 'difficilior' in any possible, acceptable sense. Coxon 1947 showed that normal responsion between a single strophic pair can be reconstructed and his suggestion is clearly on the right path.

1005	εὐνᾶσθαι	Ellendt, εὐνάσαι MSS; a very difficult and corrupt passage, complicated by metrical problems. εὐνάσαι (from εὐνάω) of the codd is suspect chiefly because it can only be transitive. L has a varia lectio εὐνᾶσαι which is, according to Jebb, a point of departure to reconstruct the authentic εὐνᾶσθαι (from εὐνάζω).

1006	ὕστατον	the second ὕστατον is understood as a sort of internal obj. with εὐνᾶσθαι (cf. Jebb's "let me sleep my last").

1009	ἀνατέτροφας	from τρέπω; see Schol: ὅ τι ἂν ἡσυχάσῃ τοῦ κακοῦ τούτου πάλιν κινήσας ἀνέτρεψας οἷον τι ἂν τῶν ὀδυνῶν μύσῃ τοῦτο διήγειρας

1009	καὶ	"contrasts the objective reality of an idea with its subjective reality" (Denniston p. 321). Still AuxZ, since it adds focus to the reality of a single concept (in Hdt 5.101.1 it stresses the reality of one adjective). Still, the AuxY-interpretation is tempting.

1009	μύσῃ	subj. without ἄν (see scholium): K-G II 426 note 1; and Bers p. 157

1011	πόθεν	interpreted either as: 1. "whence are ye? Of what stock?" (Jebb), i.e. origin which express quality; also, the question probably implies that they are unworthy to be called "Greeks" (Easterling) 2. "from whence did you show yourself? Because none appeared from any quarter" (Campbell, following Hermann, and followed by Kam and Longo).

1011	Ἑλλάνων	can be puzzling: H did not especially purify the Malis among all the Hellenic regions and see on πόθεν; Ll-J reads Ἕλλανες with Koechly

1011	οὓς	codd, is maintained by Jebb, whereas Ll-J reads οἶς with Wakefield. It is certainly difficult: Kam. recalls the double-acc construction of the καθαίρω, as well as of the other verbs for cleaning and cleansing; Longo speaks of anacoluthon, as if the sentence was meant to be οὓς εὖ ποιῶν. Indeed, καθαίρω with acc. in the sense "cleanse from pests" (as Jebb notes) in generally does not govern an acc. of person, but is said of lands or regions (e.g. γαῖαν).

1011	δὴ	difficult to classify between sent. adv. and emphasizing: "like γε, δή normally emphasizes the preceding words [but with exceptions: see I.6 and II]: but δή is bound to the relevant word by a looser bond, and is more able to spread its influence over a whole clause" (D 204). Here it is clearly attached to the relative sentence, and to the relative pronoun: "with relatives, usually stressing the importance of the antecedent, or its exact identification with the consequent", where it is cleat that "it emphasizes structural words, which affects the whole architecture of the sentence" (D 218). Therefore, it is an AuxY.

1012	καὶ	clearly, loosely attached to the syntactic structures that precede. The syntax is much more irregular also on account of the preceding πολλὰ μέν, to which καί νῦν may seem to answer.

1014	ἐπιτρέψει	recc, ἀποτρέψει LA; but it is very doubtful whether this verb can be so used with ἔγχος. Ll-J&W prints οὔ ποτε τρέψει

1016	βίᾳ	Wakefield, βίου MSS; with Jebb's text the gen. is indeed unaccountable. But it is much more probable that the meter requires us to pose lacuna before μολὼν; therefore, a governing word for βίου can very well have disappeared from the text. See the schol and Easterling's note, who judiciously conclude that, on account of the lacuna, 1. is unwise to alter the text 2. βίᾳ is hardly needed after a violent word as ἀπαράξαι.

1016	στυγεροῦ	as the Jebb and Storr's text stand, it can be taken with the ἀπό in the verb (cf. Jebb: 'strike the head from this accursed body') or with κᾶρα. Same ambiguity in Hdt. 5.112: ἀ. τοῦ ἵππου τοὺς πόδας. But it is very probable that the real head is βίου ('the life of this wretched'), governed in its turn by some lost adjective in lacuna (cf. Ll-J's παυσίπονος or λυσίπονονς).

1018	μεῖζον	"is proleptic with ἀνήκει, 'has risen, so as to be greater'" (Jebb); 'has reached the point of being too great for my strength" (East)

1019	ἑτοίμα	Jebb, ὄμμα MSS; indeed, ὄμμα is certainly corrupt, but the transmitted text "like Herakles cannot be healed" (Davis). It is possible that Ll-J's hypothesis (based on Günter and J.F. Martin) is on the right track: σοί γε τὸ σῶμα ἐς πλέον ἡβᾷ ἐμοῦ. 

1020	σῴζειν	Jebb takes it with the comparative conj.: "in too large a measure for the saving of him by my means"

1021	ὀδυνᾶν	λαθίπονον δ᾽ ὀδυνᾶν [...] βίοτον Musgrave, λαθίπονον δ᾽ ὀδύναν [...] βιότου MSS, accepted now by Ll-J. Yet it is true that Musgrave's conjecture yields a much smoother syntax, as even Kam recognizes. It may be noted that the intervention is slight indeed, for ὀδυνᾶν is only a metter of lecture (so Longo) and -ου for -ον is scarcely a conjecture.

1024	με	note the reduplication (which is annotated with AuxY for all the redoubled words); as for the construction, με can be referred: 1. to κουφίσας alone (Jebb), on account of the fact that προσλαμβάνω (act.) means "lend a helping hand (in raising me thus)", while "lay hold of me" would require προσλαβοῦ 2. with the verb, either in the meaning "take hold" (Ll-J), or "hold me closely" (Kam), or a tighter combination of verb + participle (Longo and Schiassi). This last seems the best solution and requires the obj. to be taken with the whole verbal idea (verb + part. > dependency on the verb). The same goes for τᾷδε.

1031	τόδε	nominative: after the mention of the νόσος, again a generic subject like (like with ἧπταί μου, l. 1010). Or could it be a cognate acc. ('it outrages me in this fashion')?

1034	φύτορ'	Dindorf, φύσαντ' MSS, which cannot stand for metrical reasons. Dindorf's solution is certainly better than the other alternatives: see Longo.

1035	ὑπὸ	note the construction of παῖσον with ὑπὸ + local gen. + possessive (ὑπὸ ἐμᾶς κλῇδος); it is used, as Longo writes, instead of the more common παῖσόν με ὑπὸ κλῇδος.

1042	εὔνασον	with short α, from εὐνάζω.

1043	φθίσας	"Il rapporto participio verbo è qui ben diverso da vv. 1024-5 [evoked by Kam] [...]. φθίσας ha una precisa funzione epesegetica, e insieme regge l'ὠκυπέτᾳ μόρῳ [and, we may add, τόν μέλεον: see Ll-J's translation]" (Longo).

1045	οἵαις	recc., οἵας LA, which is retained by Hermann, Schneidewin, Ellendt. Longo explains it as an internal obj. with a passive verb, and deems it "a more precious" variant. Yet "one could not say ἐλαύνομαι συμφοράς" (Kam).

1046	πολλὰ	the three neuter are the substantivated obj's of the participle. Different constructions are possible: 1. Kam takes κακά as adj (or, perhaps, as apposition to πολλά καὶ θερμά?), but this is rightly refuted by Longo 2. Longo considers the possibility of taking πολλά and θερμά (with καί οὐ λόγῳ) as adj's of κακά, but he ultimately rejects it. 3. we may construe with πολλά, θερμά and οὐ λόγῳ as attributive of the subst. κακά, but that also is very harsh.

1046	θερμά	"θερμός was said (1) of a hot or rash temperament (Ant.88): (2) of a rash deed, as in Plut 415 "ὦ θερμὸν ἔργον κἀνόσιον καὶ παράνομον" | "τολμῶντε δρᾶν". Here θερμὰ is not 'rash,' but expresses intense conflict with deadly peril; as we speak of 'a hot fight." (Jebb)

1046	κoὐ	Bothe, καί MSS and Cic. Tusc. 2.20: "dictu gravia". Cicero's witness weight quite strongly. Those who retain the Mss' explain the καί as AuxZ, 'even' (Ll-J), 'même' (Mazon), so that it does not have the same coordinate function as the one preceding and the one following; this change is deemed 'very harsh' by Davis. Others retain the καί but alters other part of the text: καλά Jackson, or Wunder's καὶ λόγων πέρα.

1047	ἐγώ	a verbless exclamative sentence, with a purely nominative construction: K-G I 46

1048	τοιοῦτον	note the ending for the neut acc. (instead of τοιοῦτο); the balance between the two correlative clauses (τοιοῦτον προὔθηκεν... οἷον καθῆψεν) is very uneven and the syntax is very blurred.

1049	προύθηκεν	προτίθημι said of appointed tasks (LSJ)

1053	ἐκ	ἐκ...βέβρωκε... ἐκ...πέπωκεν: note the parallelism of tmesis, of perfect tense and on the metrical position of the two verbs (Longo)

1055	ξυνοικοῦν	very good notes in Davis and Longo on this very Sophoclean verb to express the image of a forced cohabitation with evil. Dawe's disaffection with the verb here is totally misplaced.

1058		κοὐ	the combination οὐ...οὔτε(...οὔτε) is exceptional, especially in Attic; οὔτε tends to be emended in οὐδέ, but quite unnecessarily. It is more frequent in Homer, where the οὔτε-clause can be taken to represent an afterthought (e.g. 6.451; see Denniston p. 509).

1062	δέ	"the adversative δέ is idiomatic when the priamel's foil is dismissed and its climatic point achieved", Davis who quotes Sapph. fr. 16.4 and Race's book on priamel.

1062	φῦσα	Nauck, οὖσα MSS; a notoriously difficult point. Pace Kam et Longo, the mss text can hardly be defended: see Jackson MS 70-1. The solutions adopted are either: 1. φῦσα by Nauck (and with other variations by Blaydes and Steinhart), or 2. οὖσα κἄνανδρος φύσιν Tournier and Jackson. 

1063	δὴ	with μόνη: Denniston 205.

1064	γενοῦ	well explained by Kam: παῖς ἐτήτυμος γεγώς is "the predicate to γενοῦ (παῖς ἐτήτυμος is predicate to γεγώς)

1068	τοὐμὸν	more likely = τοὐμὸν πρᾶγμα (Ellendt) than εἶδος

1071	πολλοῖσιν 	masc. for Jebb, but neuter for Ll-J ('pityful in many ways')

1072	τόδ᾽	Kam notes that in gr it is usual to have the demonstrative pron. in a coordinated relative clause (and cf. τόνδ' ἄνδρα at 1073), so that the structure is perhaps less an anacoluthon than it looks like. [but a check for consistency in annotation is needed!]

1074	εἱπόμην	so Schol. ad S. Ai. 318; ἑσπόμην MSS. The problem is twofold. One is the verbal aspect: of course, the impf. is easier with continuative action, but the aorist has been defended as a lectio difficilior by Kam (the past being considered as a one single event: Goodwin §56). The other is the verb meaning and construction with dat: Jackson MS 148. Ll-J&W with Davis adopt Meineke's εἰχόμην (cf. Ai. 272, Hdt 1.35.1). But the transmitted verb is surely better: see Longo.

1075	ἐκ	well paraphrased by Kam: "once such a man".

1075	τάλας	where possible, it is constructed regularly in the annotation. Here, it is a sheer exclamation.

1076	δείξω	performative future; see on 1079.

1079	θεᾶσθε	note the generic plural, instead of Hyllus alone; de facto, Herakles addresses the totality of the spectator, within and without the border of scenic illusion. This is important in view of the preceding δείξω.

1081	αἰαῖ	L has αἰαῖ ἆ τάλας αἰαῖ, which was variously emended so as to yield some metrical form. But it is safest to assume a dochmiac (αἰαῖ ἆ τάλας) + a αἰαῖ extra metrum.

1082	ἔθαλψεν is trans., “με” being understood

1087	ἔνσεισον	the last two imperatives hold closer together: ὦναξ and πάτερ are both referred to the same god (Zeus), and there is a climax in the verbs that point to the same action: from ἐν to κατά (Longo). Jebb and all modern editors prints a full stop after παῖσον to mark this. But as it is punctuated in Storr's text, there is no syntactical ground for isolating the last two imperatives in the series of four, each accompanied with his own vocative.

1091	δὲ	"occasionally found in passionate or lively exclamations" (Denniston 172 II) and Jebb ad OT 1097

1095	στρατόν	the sequence of attribute can be construed in different ways (see Kam): 1. Storr's punctuation presupposes Radermacher's view, with ὑβριστήν and βίαν appositions to στρατὸν 2. I prefer the construction argued by Kam and Easterling and also implied by Jebb's punctuation (reprinted by all modern edd): βίαν acc. of limitation with ὑπέροχον and ὑβριστὴν, ἄνομον and ὑπέροχον all attributes to στρατόν.

1101	τε	on the parataxis here see Kam: the τε...καί structure is almost equivalent to a construction with relative sentence. But the same καί is also at 1072 and 1048 (same expressive structure in Italian: "mezz'ora che aspetto, e nessuno mi ha ancora chiamato".

1107	γέ	γέ τοι is, according to Denniston (550-2), the only combination where the two particles adhere more closer, whereas typically τοι stands on its own. This case (as well as Ant. 1064) is analyzed as emphatic γε with the usual τοι, that brings the point to the attention of the hearer. Though Denniston adds that an interpretation with limiting (focusing) γε is also possible. At any rate, the annotation is quite the same: AuxZ with εὖ + AuxY.

1108	ὦ	cf. Ai. 1275 and Ant. 234 (with Jebb's note)

1108	μηδὲν	there is a syntactic variation in the anaphora of the clauses: the second μηδέν becomes an emphatic negative adverbial.

1109	κἀκ	"even under these circumstances", Kam, who quotes Ai 537 with his note.

1109	μόνον	"let her only come near" (Ll-J): idiomatic use in commissive sentences, i.e. it only suffices her to come here to experiment the effect of the threat (AuxY); cf. Ar. Thesm. 569, Lys. 365, 439 and Longo's note.

1110	ἐκδιδαχθῇ	again, final clauses with μανθάνω and διδάσκω are idiomatic for threats: see Longo.

1110	ἀγγέλλειν	διδάσκεσθαι may be topical (see previous note), but only Davis note that here the sentence is strangely complicated: Deianeira has to be taught not better wisdom, but how to proclaim to others the effect of baseness. Lloyd-Jones (private communication quoted by Davis) points to Pi. P. 2.21, Pl. Gor. 525c, Ver. Aen. 6.618-9.

1112	εἰσορῶ	Ll-J supplies σ' at verse end; this is made very probable by the hiatus between the two verses.

1113	γ'	with causal (ἐπεί) and hypothetical clauses (εἰ) = si quidem, quippe cum

1114	παρασχὼν	it is possible that the repetition παρέσχες / παρασχὼν ('you granted me to speak; granting me silence') "contributes to the elaborately tactful tone of Hyllus' approach to his father" (East). Pace Kam, the participle goes certainly with the main clause ("still keeping silence"): see Longo.

1116	δίκαια	here the plural is not required by the metre as in the other cases in tragedy: see Longo who quotes G-K I 66-7 and Bruhn 20.

1117	τοσοῦτον	mss, changed by some in τοιοῦτον (Mudge); the conjecture undoubtedly eases the syntax, but the transmitted text doesn't seem corrupt. It is construed adverbially with δύσοργος (so Hermann and Jebb) and it's correlative with ὡς.

1117	δάκνει	it is usually spelled δάκνῃ in all modern editions.


1118	δύσοργος	the only possible construction is explained by Jebb: μὴ τοσοῦτον δύσοργος (ὢν) ὡς δάκνει θυμῷ. Note the nominative after δός μοι σεαυτόν: Davis calls it a normal attraction of a word in sentence ending, quoting Stinton JHS 96 (1976): 127. But the anacoluthon is somewhat lessened with τοιοῦτον

1119	χαίρειν	the construction with a governing verb of will (προθυμεῖ) is noteworthy, since typically the χαίρειν is completely independent from the will or the intentions of a subject; it is simply given to men or allowed by circumstances: see Longo.

1121	πάλαι	good example of continuative πάλαι used for events that were performed on the scene (and concluded only a short while before).

1122	μητρὸς	gen. of argument, with the verb (see Davis and Longo for other views). So, the verb construction amount to an appositive structure with proleptic argument + epexegetical interrogative.

1122	ἥκω	+ fut. part., here it practically amounts to "I am going to". A wholly periphrastical annotation (with ἥκω AuxV) could be envisaged.

1123	ὥς	Nauck's not happy emendation for οἷς MSS; it can be questioned whether the dative can be governed by ἁμαρτάνειν (Cambpbell, with wrong examples, and Longo, quoting Pl. Gor. 489b) or if it depends on ἐν. In that case, the first preposition can be implied in both complement, on (more likely) ἔστ' ἐν (codex Harleianus 5734 and conj. Balydes) is needed in place of ἐστιν.

1124	"καί gives an indignant emphasis to the verb,—'hast thou indeed...?'" (Jebb)

1127	δῆτα	"no indeed", expressing agreement with a previous negative statement

1128	ἀλλ᾽ ἀλλ#ά μὲν δὴ seems to adhere closer and to reinforce the adversative tone of the sentence: see Denniston 394-5. Note that the separation of the particles is typically Sophoclean

1130	ἀρτίως	with the verbal idea in νεοσφαγής: cf. Ai. 898, Ant. 1283

1133	πρὶν	note the same illogical rapport as in Ai. 110: τέθνηκε... πρὶν θανεῖν, but in both cases the interruptions in stichomythia make the logical/syntactical relation much weaker.

1133	ὡς	parenthetical, producing an interrupted word order (cf. Jebb: "Alas, before she did by mine, as she deserved")

1136	χρῆμ᾽	construe it with ἥμαρτε, as internal obj. (or as an acc. of relation). The other alternative is to take the clause ἅπαν τὸ χρῆμα as a colloquialism to mean: "the whole thing is". But this construction is very dubious: see Longo; Storr's comma after χρῆμα should be removed.

1138	στέργημα	Jebb rightly notices how the w-o throws emphasis on this word. The formation is irregular, but is well explained by Jebb and Longo. Longo quoting Campbell notes that, somehow, it is like the στέργειν is paralleled to φιλεῖν in φίλτρον. But note the peculiar construction with obj. genitive, as if the verb was causative.

1140τοσοῦτος	'so potent: Plat. Symp. 177C "τοσοῦτος θεός".' (Jebb)

1149	ἐμοῦ	can be construed with the verb (Jebb) or with φήμην (Schol. and Kam); see Longo for the many ambiguities of the sentence

1151	τε	answered by the δέ in 1153

1157	οὖν	The particle δέ and οὖν are rarely separated by intervening words; in this combination: "δέ almost always [...] has some contrasting force, and is hardly purely copulative"; also "οὖν marks the opposed idea as essential" (Denniston 460). It makes sense, therefore, to annotate οὖν as AuxZ with δέ

1160	ἐμπνεόντων	τῶν ἐμπνεόντων Erfurdt, πρὸς τῶν πνεόντων MSS; the transmitted text yields a singular construction with two different complements governed by θανεῖν: πρὸς τῶν πνεόντων and μηδενὸς ὕπο. This text is explained by Easterling as the product of an intruding gloss (ὕπο) at the end of the line. But the text (although probably lacking exact Sophoclean parallels: Davis vs Moorhouse) is not impossible at all. Hermann explained it as the confluence of two different ideas: "per vivos a nemine occisum iri". The transmitted text is defended also by Moorhouse; other conjectures are ποτε (instead of ὕπο, Musgrave), or με δεῖν θανεῖν for θανεῖν ὕπο (Dawe, which would explain the error with the loss of με δεῖν after μηδενὸς and the intrusion of ὕπο).

1161	πέλοι	explained as a case of attraction: = ἀλλ' (ἐκείνου) ὅστις (Kamerbeek, Easterling); but the nominative sounds indeed very much as an anacoluthon, as if κτανεῖν μηδένα τῶν πνεόντων preceded, or τοῦτον ἐμὲ κτανεῖν followed (Longo).

1163	πρόφαντον	τὸ θεῖον ἦν πρόφαντον can be construed: 1. with πρόφαντον substantivated and θεῖον as epithet ('the divine prophecy'); 2. with πρόφαντον predicate governed by the copula and τὸ θεῖον = "the divine word" ("divine will", Jebb, is excessive). This last solution seems better

1164	ἴσα	predicative with συμβαίνω, cf. 1174 and E. Hel. 622

1164	συμβαίνοντ'	"A metà strada tra predicativo e attributivo"; but the attributive is much stronger, since φαίνειν retains its full force: "I shall reveal".


1168	πολυγλώσσου	with πολυ intensifying (Longo): "many voiced"

1171	ἐμοὶ	the connection with the verb seems to me a little more perceptible; but it can also be taken with ἐφεστώτων and, perhaps, ἀπὸ κοινοῦ (Kam)

καὶ	χρόνῳ τῷ ζῶντι καὶ παρόντι νῦν: a very emphatic and striking phrase; the present time is conceived as a living entity, and, which is interesting, almost in the moment of death (Longo).

1175	αὖ	'on your turn', rather than 'anew' (Easterling)

1176	στόμα	can be taken either as: 1. subj. (Kam., Campbell: "don't wait for my tongue to sharpen you", i.e. don't wait fro my encouragement/reproach) or 2. obj of ὀξύναι ("don't wait so as to sharpen my tongue", thus East., i.e. don't wait until you make me angry). But 2 is much preferable (Longo).

1177	εἰκαθόντα	εἰκαθεῖν = form of aorist for εἴκω, used here "absolutely" (i.e. without expressed complement): see F-J&W ad A. Su. 202.

1179	στάσιν	taken as: 1. the point, to which the discussion has come (λόγου): Jebb and almost all 2. in analogy with OT 634 (στάσιν γλώσσης), context of words; so Hyllus would say that he fears that, at this point, there will be a

1183	δ'	note the succession οὐ + fut, μή + fut: see Ai. 75 (with Kam's note), Bruhn § 159, Goodwin 299, Moorhouse 238. The construction of οὐ + fut denotes impatience, and it is more in line with the style of comedy than tragedy (Longo).

1185	νυν	not adverbial, but with the command

1186	ἦ μὴν	in oaths, pledges and solemn declarations (Denniston 350-1); μὴν is emphatic and asseverative of the preceding ἦ

1187	ἐμοὶ	with the verb: cf. Il. 10.104, 9.244

1192	ὡς	goes with θυτήρ, certainly not with σταθείς (as Campbell and Kam would have it)

1199	γόου note the construction with δάκρυ, that strengthen the association of γόος and tears. The gen. can be of origin, gen. pro adiectivo (γοερόν) or partitive (both these last hypotheses in Longo). Alternatively, if we take it as epexegeticum (Davis, who quotes TrGF adesp. 664.24 αἰσχύνης βοήν) then γόος = δάκρυ.

1199	εἰσίτω	considered suspicious by Jackson (MS, p. 158); its construction is not very clear (sc. σε? sc. τῷ ἔργῳ?); and Jackson argues that it cannot point to the outburst (and the display) of emotion. Jackson revived Blayde's exhortative subj. εἰσίδω which is accepted by Ll-J and Davis.

1202	ἀραῖος	I follow Kamerbeek's construction: grouping the words into νέρθεν ὤν, on the one hand, and ἀραῖος εἰσαεὶ βαρύς (predicatively with μενῶ) on the other. As Longo writes, the double adj is on account of the predicative nature of ἀραῖος.

1203	δ'	inserted by the recc to avoid hiatus but absent in L. Most editors nowadays accept the hiatus.

1208	ἀλλ᾽	the sentence is very elliptical, cf. the acc. παιώνιον καὶ ἰατῆρα; sc. οὐ δῆτ᾽ ἔγωγ᾽ < σε φονέα γενέσθαι ἐκκαλοῦμαι >, ἀλλὰ < σε γενέσθαι ἐκκαλοῦμαι > παιώνιον καὶ ἰατῆρα (Kam).

1209	ἔχω	the relation with the following κακῶν may be doubtful; we can: 1. take the two complements separately with the adjectives (ὧν ἔχω παιώνιον / ἰατῆρα τῶν ἐμῶν κακῶν; Jebb, Kam, East.) 2. take the relative with κακῶν: τῶν ἐμῶν κακῶν ἃ ἔχω (cf. Ll-J's translation: "the be the healer and the only curer of the ills from which I suffer") 3. to alter the text, and the best emendation is Winnington-Ingram's ὡς σ' ἔχω (although cf. Davis contra). N. 1 seems the best course.

1213	πλήρωμα	nom. sc. οὐ γενήσεται, from the preceding line. 

1214	καμεῖ	"2nd pers. sing. midd., thou shalt have no difficulty, τοὐμὸν μέρος, on my part (acc. of respect: cp. Ant.1062“τὸ σὸν μέρος”, n.)", Jebb

1225	ὁμοῦ	here it is used as a preposition with the dat.

1227 ἀλλ'	"La serie τοιαύτην... δάμαρτα... προσθοῦ μηδ' ἄλλος ἀνδρῶν... λάβοι ποτέ, ἀλλ' αὐτός etc. ci dà un esempio di un tipico stilema sofocleo, quello di tre enunciati dei quali il secondo è antitetico al primo, mentre il terzo ribadisce il primo (A, e nonB, ma A). Così ai vv. 431 ss., Ai. 1111 ss., OT 337 ss., ANT 465 ss., e vedi Jebb ad l., e Bruhn 215, che dà altro materiale" (Longo).

1229	σμικροῖς	"disobey a trivial command", Campbell (taking the dat. as governed by the verb). But it could also be dat. or respect: "fail me in small things" (Ll-J), and Jebb quotes Ph. πρᾶγμ̓, ὅτῳ σ᾽ ἐνύβρισαν

1233	τίς	it is perhaps better to interpreter the sentence as an anacoluthon, with a "false start" that is re-written when the first τίς is taken up at line 1235: note the feminine pronoun ἥ that remains without antecedents, but is supplanted by the neuter ταῦτα

1233	μοι	introduces some blurring in the antithesis of datives μητρὶ μὲν / σοί τ' (Longo); it is, as often, ambiguous between an ethic dative and a possessive dative. This last value seems a little stronger to me on account of the syntactical association with μητρί

1238	νεμεῖν	the editors talk of "attraction" (from Hermann on) of the construction, or of contamination of different structures. The truly parenthetical ὡς ἔοικεν (Davis) is made to govern what ought to be the main verb. It is hard to choose between the different forms of annotation: 1. attraction; so, like with the rel., the verb is given its role independently from his morphology 2. strict syntax, where it seems that νεμεῖν is really dependent of the parenthetical verb. On account of the terminology and of the analogy with the relative clauses, we adopted 1. More on this phenomenon in Bruhn § 176, Jebb ad loc and K-G II 581 

1246	δυσσέβεια	on this kind of nominal sentence see Kam. It would seem that the subj. of the nominal predication (of which δυσσέβεια is the predicative) is expressed in the hypothetical clause.

1247	πανδίκως	ambiguous to construe: 1. with πράσσειν: "to do the deed with full justification" (Jebb, East); 2. with ἄνωγας: "in full authority" (Campbell, Longo, Ll-J).

1254	τιν'	as often, with the second element of an alternative, whereas it logically belongs to both (we would place it with the first element).

1259	ἀνακινῆσαι	trans. according to Hermann, Jebb, Longo and all the other more recent edd. Intransitive (with νόσον as sbj.) for Campbell and Kamerbeek. But the transitive interpretation is better: as Longo points out, this makes the ψυχή the center of all activity, which is in line with the tone of passage.

1273	δ'	on the structure see Longo: οἰκτρὰ and αἰσχρὰ makes one single side of the antithesis, whereas both are contrasted with Herakles' destiny (χαλεπώτατα δ᾽ οὖν); the δ᾽ οὖν makes clear that "the consequences to Heracles are what really matters" (Denniston 461).

1275	παρθέν'	it is very controversial whether these words must be assigned to the Chorus or to Hyllus. Since the antiquity, both interpretations are followed. The manuscripts waive (A has even the double attribution, whereas a scholium in L states the doubt); one papyrus tribute them to the Chorus. If this last option is followed, then we have here a self reference with a second person singular and a collective vocative (παρθένε). It is possible that Longo is right and the final consideration (which moves away from accusation against the gods and points to Zeus as the final origin of all that happens) is not compatible with Hyllus attitude and would fit the Chorus better. Yet the collective self-address in second person singular is very difficult and lacks proper parallels (see Davis and Kaimio).

1275	ἀπ'	notoriously difficult: see Dawe Studies 3.98, who dismisses the meaning "stay away from the house". This is also ruled out by reasons of dramatical action: the Chorus' own houses are completely irrelevant, and the only οἶκοι that can be possibly mentioned is the palace displayed on scene (Easterling). ἐπ' should be read instead, with a variant in L (Lγρ) and the Triclinian manuscripts; with that, the meaning could become "do not be left behind in the house", as it is required by the dramatic action.
















