1999.01.0187: Sophoclis Electra
**********************************************

Editions used:
- Jebb: text, comment, translation
- Campbell: text and comment
- Kamberbeek: comment
- Lloyd-Jones (loeb): text and translation
- Dawe (1st ed)
- Kaibel: text and comment
- Finglass: text and comment
- Pattoni/Medda: text, translation, commentary

6	λυκοκτόνου	note the adj. that explains the attribute Λύκειος for the ἀγορὰ. The exact etymology of Λύκειος is disputed. Sophocles etymological play makes his idea very clear.

8	ἱκάνομεν	the relative with οἶ is left somewhat suspended, without any clear antecedent in the main clause; the construction continues with φάσκειν ὁρᾶν Μυκήνας which gives a new turn to the syntax and triggers another relative.

10	τε	governing, it would seem, the two complements of ὁρᾶν (δῶμα and Μυκήνας: so Campbell); but see on τόδε

10	τόδε	we may doubt whether the construction is not rather predicative than attributive, i.e. if we shouldn't make a nominative sentence (as in vv. 4, 7) coordinated with the φάσκειν. 

11	ἐκ	either "away" or "after" the slaughter; the first is surely better (Kam); it logically belongs to only ἤνεγκα in either case. There is a sort of syntactic redundance with ὅθεν

11	φονῶν	the transmitted lesson can be accented either as: 1. φονῶν with Storr, i.e. from φονή 2. φόνων, i.e. from φόνος, with the majority of the interpreters (Jebb, Kam and so on). The first word, always used in plural except in the Suid. lexicon, refers more specifically to the action of killing, as well as to the carnage and the blood shed (cf. the Iliad); the second is more allusive of the broader context of the killing (with the aftermaths) and therefore is more to the point (Campbell); the repetition of φόνου at the end of the sentence is no problem (cf. Longo on Tr. 1270, ἐφορᾷ). Dindorf's accentuation is accepted by Finglass: it accentuates, in his opinion, "Electra's daring and resourcefulness. She does not merely rescue Orestes after her father's murder, but snatches him away even as his father is falling to a gory death".

12	καὶ	note the redundance in this endyadis, in which both terms ammounts to practically the same concept ('thy sister'). This emphasis is, in Sophocles especially, typical for strong (i.e. familial) social bonds.

16	βουλευτέον	"verbal" adjective, as usual construed nominally. Note that the dat. of agent is left unexpressed ("ὑμῖν or ἡμῖν?", Kam) and that the construction changes slightly with the imperative ξυνάπτετον of line 21. This (and the fact the Pylades remains silent) has generated some warries: Porsons (quoted by Dawe in apparatus) conjectured βουλεύτον, whereas A and other mss have ξυναπτέον ad 21. In truth, Hermann (ad 21) has said all about the dynamic of the dialogue: first the Pedagogue speaks, inviting all to take counsels; then, he urges the two to make proposals, which Orestes does in a way that does not require Pylades to add anything. This is absolutely coherent with the best transmitted variants.

18	σαφῆ	taken predicatively with the verb (cf. Hermann): "waking... into clearness" (Jebb); not ornamental, but pointing significantly at the clear sign of the hour: "	σαφῆ, i.e. not a doubtful twitter here and there, but the unanimous warbling which tells that the morning is really come" (Campbell).

19	ἄστρων	"ἄστρων εὐφρόνη dicitur pro εὐφρόνη ἀστερόεσσα" (Hermann). It cannot be joined with the verb in no possible construction (either if we join to the transmitted ἐκλείπω or if we read, with Groeneboom, ἐλλείπω, which would only mean that the night is fall short of stars). No doubt shall arise from the connection with μέλαινα. Finglass has a rich bibliography for the gen. qualitatis.

21	λόγοις	instr. dative with ξυνάπτετον, the object being implied by the context (Kam); here it is nonetheless noted as OBJ, because, as Jebb notes, here it stands in place of ἐς λόγους in the most used form of this idiom; possibly, it is an intrans. construction of a transitive verb (Campbell).

21	ἐμέν	is glossed as ἐσμέν and attested in this sense in Callim. fr. 561 Pf.; but this fragment of Callimachus is considered corrupt by modern editors, so that not much worth, if any, is attached to its witness. Emendation, though, is not an easy task. Dawes' ἴμεν is the most popular solution (Campbell, Dain, Dawe), but this solution seems dubious. It is explained by Campb. and others as "we move about in a place" > "we are", but this is surely ruled out by the meaning of εἶμι (see Hermann and Jebb). Jebb prints the transmitted text between daggers and so do Kaibel and Kam; Hermann's reconstruction (ὡς ἐνταῦθ' ἵνα | οὐκ ἔστ' ἔτι) is indeed tempting, but the explained origin of the corruption (which is at first sight one of its strengths) does not resist to a closer inspection (see Finglass). I tend to agree with Finglass: "it is difficult to accept that the rare word ἐμέν was deliberately inserted into the text".

24	γεγώς	not "splendid fellow that you are to me" (Kells, if I understand rightly, taking γεγώς as adverbial participle); but σημεῖα φαίνεις = δῆλος εἶ (Jebb), with predicative participle: "how clear are the sign of your loyalty that you show to me".

26	δεινοῖς	the dangers; τὰ δεινά: cf. Thuc. 1.84 (τῶν...ἐξοτρυνόντων ἡμᾶς ἐπὶ τὰ δεινά), quoted by Jebb

26	ἀπώλεσεν	note the gnomic aorist, coupled with a (atemporal) present ἵστησιν

27	δὲ	a good example of apodotic δέ

28	πρώτοις	military idiom (Jebb), neglected by LSJ: to "follow in the foremost of battle", i.e. between the first ranks of the phalanx (cf. Kells' paraphrasis: 'in the forefront of those following up (my commands)'); masculine, therefore.

31	τι	adverbial, frequent in hypothetic clauses

33	πατρὶ	L ante correctionem, "more expressive" than the gen. transmitted by the other mss (Campbell, who quotes Ess. on L. §13 p. 19).

34	ἀροίμην	from ἄρνυμαι (α is short!). "Pendet hic modus ex optativo qui precessit, vice fungens coniunctivi, si recta oratio est, πῶς ἄρωμαι δίκας; vel indicativi futuri, si πῶς ἀροῦμαι δίκας. Itaque, ambiguum est, ἀροίμην utrum sit futuri optativus, an aoristi secundi, rarioris quam primus est" (Hermann). But, as Jebb notes, the normal expression is the deliberative aor. subjunctive and the ind. fut. is generally retained even in oblique statements.

36	αὐτὸν	"est ipsum, i.e. non per alios" (Hermann)

37	κλέψαι	"as often 'do something by fraud' (or the like)", Kam; it governs σφαγάς as obj and δόλοισι as instr. dat.

37	χειρὸς	subjective gen. with σφαγάς: "the rightful slaughter performed by your hand"

37	ἐνδίκους	Finglass supports Lange's correction, ἐνδίκου (attr. with χειρός), printed and advocated also by L-J&W, on account of the fact that χειρός alone without attribute would be extremely awkward; he quotes Fraenkel ad A. Ag. 1495-6.

45	ὃ	written with accent by Storr in accordance with an old practice known to Eustathius (p. 23.3 on Il. 1.9), but unsupported by any serious ground: see Jebb

46	τυγχάνει	sc. ὤν

47	ὅρκον	Reiske, ὅρκῳ codd. The transmitted text has been defended following two courses: 1. ἄγγελλε δ᾽ ὅρκῳ < ὅρκον > προστιθεὶς 2. ἄγγελλε δ᾽ προστιθεὶς < τὰ ἀγγελλόμενα > ὅρκῳ (Campbell), i.e. by adding an implied obj. to προστιθεὶς (which could also be σεαυτόν: see Kam); but this is surely more awkward than Reiske's easy emendation

61	δοκῶ	"δοκῶ μέν," a widespread formula, that introduces paratactically a statement (note that L and other codd have δοκῶ μὲν ὡς. Others (Dawe) don't print the comma and have κακόν as a predicative of the obj.

65	ὡς	or ὣς (adv, 'thus')? Editors are notoriously suspicious of ὣς in Attic writers: see Fraenkel ad Ag. 930. Fraenkel, agreeing with Hermann, concludes that in S. El. 65 ὡς is "used relatively", i.e. like a incipitarian ὅς = "and he"; "in which manner" = "in that very manner".

68	ὁδοῖς	ταῖσδε ταῖς ὁδοῖς most likely with εὐτυχοῦντα: "fortunate in this journey" (Kells); or possibly with the whole sentence δέξασθέ μ᾽ εὐτυχοῦντα (and thus with δέξασθε): 'bei diesem Gange den ich vorhabe' (Keibel).

72	ἀλλ᾽	the logical structure of the sentence, of course, requires that ἀρχέπλουτον καὶ καταστάτην are not taken predicatively with ἀποστείλητε. Rather, a verb must be implied from the preceding leg, something like πέμψετε (Jebb). But the syntax yields a small illogicity all the same, since Orestes cannot pray to be dismiss, not even after a sucess, when he returns on his own land. Kamerbeek interpretes it as a "zeugma of the type involving the supplying from the preceding negative of a positive opposite", and quotes K-G II 566 k; therefore, something like "allow me to stay" should be implied, according to him.

73	νυν	there is some confusion on the accentuation, either for the meaning attributed to this particle or for the simple orthography. But Finglass is right on both points and can be quoted here: "according to ancient grammarians, νυν always took a circumflex accent when its vowel was long, whether inferential or temporal (cf. Ruijgh (1957), 64-7). I retain the traditional accentuation to provide a visual distinction between the senses", rightly: he must be followed. A temporal meaning (as it seems to be suggested by Hermann) is not in place: see Jebb. 

74	χρέος	the construction is very ambiguous: τὸ σὸν χρέος can be taken either as 1. sbj. of μελέσθω with φρορῆσαι = inf. epexegeticum 2. obj. of φρουρῆσαι with μελέσθω impersonal. The force of the first construction seems a little more perceptible, on account of word-order; also, absolute φρουρῆσαι is more common.

78	καὶ	καὶ μὴν introducing a new character on the stage (Denn. 356)

78	θυρῶν	the genitive can be attached to: 1. ἔνδον (Schol., Campb., Kam.) 2. αἴσθεσθαι as a gen. of origin ('a foribus': Hermann, Jebb) 3. local gen. with ὑποστενούσης (alternatively, Jebb). Campbell blurs 1 and 2, noting that the use of the gen. of origin "is softened by the addition of ἔνδον, with which θυρῶν is to be resumed". This last hypothesis (of a stronger dependency bond between ἔνδον and θυρῶν) seems the best option.

80	ἐστὶν	as usual, when it precedes all elements of the predication, it leans either toward a stronger existential meaning, or toward stressing the reality of the predication (cf. Ai. 664). See Finglass for the construction: ἡ δύστηνος sbj, Ἠλέκτρα predicate. The sentence should be punctuated with a question mark. Its attribution to the Pedagogue (Dawe, following Sandbach, with the following re-attribution of 82-5 to Orestes) is out of question.

83	πειρώμεθ'	see Kam. for the construction

ἐφ'	"φέρει … ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν, i.e. brings (so as to place it) in our power" (Jebb). Some editors (Pearson, Kam, Dawe) find fault with this expression; Tournier's φέρειν νίκην τέ φημι is printed by Pearson and Dawe, and recommended by Kam; for others emendations see Broadhead (BICS 8, 1961, p. 49)

86	γῆς	ἰσόμοιρος govern the gen. rei in his other attestations. That certainly makes Jebb's interpretation, viz. that aer shares the same μοῖρα as earth, with the gen. of the thing that has the share, unsustainable, however sound its cosmology may be. But what element should be implied as sharing an equal part of the earth with aer? Two hypothesis can be advanced: 1. ἵσην μοῖραν ἔχων τῆς γῆς <τῷ φάει>, i.e. air shares an equal part of land as light; yet this is very awkward, and requires us to imply φάει from the preceding vocative (see Finglass right criticism); 2. Schneidewin quoted Ar. Av. 187 (ἐν μέσῳ δήπουθεν ἀήρ ἐστι γῆς (sc. καὶ οὐρανοῦ)); Schneidewin would have the second genitive implied here to be φάους (i.e. αἰθέρος: the aer shares an equal part of land and aether, i.e. it stands between them), a solution which is rightly criticized by Finglass. But why (as with Aristophanes' example) cannot we read the line as "air who shares an equal part of earth (and of sky)"? As Finglass says, aer and aether are often not distinguished in tragedy, so that aer can be taken as the only medium between the two poles. In that case, the second term that is implied is, as Schneidewin would have it, a second genitive (οὐρανοῦ), not a dative; and the association of air and sky would be so obvious that, as in the case of the "Birds", it wouldn't have needed to be mentioned. All major difficulties raised by Finglass would thus fall and we would have a totally satisfying interpretation without even the trivial alteration of the transmitted text argued in his commentary.

92	τὰ	taken as obj. of ξυνίσασι, with the interr. ὅσα θρηνῶ as epexegetic apposition (Jebb); others makes it ann acc. of reference ('as for'). The phrase τὰ παννυχίδων should therefore be compared to τὰ τοῦ πολέμου etc., and mean "that which concerns my night-time vigils". The expression is no doubt singular: cf. ad 93 οἴκων

93	οἴκων	as it stands, it seems difficult to construe it with anything but εὑναί ('the hated bed of this woeful household'). The expression is undoubtedly weak. Many emendations have been proposed, so as to solve this and the problem of τὰ παννυχίδων: 1. Kaibel read μογέρ' οἰκείων, taking τά with μογερά and οἰκείων (= 'my own') with παννυχίδων 2. Dawe reads with Blaydes παννυχίων... οἴκτων. None of them (but Kaibel's solution has something to recommend itself) seems very convincing, and the transmitted text, though not above suspicion, can stand.

99	κάρα	ὃν σχίζουσι κάρα = double acc. of the whole and part

100	τούτων	cf. Kamerbeek ad S. Tr. 1072: coordinated relatives often have a demonstrative in the second leg. Here it is not strictly so, since the demonstrative does not take up the same antecedent as ὅν; but τούτων refers to the killing described in the δέ clause, and should therefore be coupled with that sentence, however anacoluthical te construction may seem.

103	ἀλλ᾽	see Denniston 394 ('Yet, for all that')

103	λήξω	governs both the genitive (θρήνων στυγερῶν τε γόων) and the infinitive μὴ οὐ... προφωνεῖν (note the negatives). The annotation follows the convention of the appositive structure, which amount to taking προφωνεῖν ἠχὼ etc. as the description of the γόοι and θρῆνοι.

106	δὲ	ἔστ᾽ ἂν λεύσσω ... λεύσσω δὲ τόδ᾽ ἦμαρ codd, primum λεύσσω delevit Hermann. So, as it is now printed, the δὲ coordinates the two obj's of λεύσσω; note that the vulgate comma (which is rather useless now) is maintained in the text.

108	"ἐπὶ κωκυτῷ: the prep. is not merely=‘with,’ but implies, ‘with continual wailing’: see n. on Ant. 759 'ἐπὶ ψόγοισι.'" (Jebb)

114	αἳ	ὁρᾶθ᾽ , αἳ τοὺς Dobree, ὁρᾶτε τοὺς codd. The correction leaves a second relative in anaphora, with elided verb to be implied by the previous ὁρᾶτε. Hermann poses lacuna before τοὺς εὐνάς; Kiabel also is against Dobree's conjecture, but his perplexities are rightly countered by Kam.

121	παῖ	not mere word-repetition (AuxY), bur rather expansion of the simple invocation ὦ παῖ with a more elaborate apostrophe; APOS, therefore.

123	τάκεις	"τὸν πάλαι κ.τ.λ., acc. depending on τάκεις οἰμωγάν as= οἰμώζεις". But it is perhaps better to analyze the construct as Finglass does: "οἰμωγάν is a verbal noun which governs τὸν...Ἀγαμέμνονα"; he quotes A. Se. 289-90, which is excellent

130	παραμύθιον	is generally taken as acc. in apposition to the sentence, 'you have come, and this is a consolation' (Campbell, Jebb, Kam); but nominative to be taken predicatively with the subject seems better. It seems certainly better if Elettra insists on the intentions, not on the effects of consolations.

132	δ'	οὐδέ is adversative

142	ἐστιν	"The antecedent of οἷς is to be inferred from the preceding words: sc. ἐν τοῖς οὐ μετρίοις τούτοις ἀλγήμασιν" (Campbell); but the easier course is to take the content of the whole main clause of the antecedent of the relative. Cf. Jebb: "ἐν οἷς, referring to the general sense of what precedes, ‘in which course.’".

146	ἄραρεν	traditionally interpreted as a redoubled unaugmented aorist, on the analogy of the frequent Homeric usage. Yet Finglass (with bibliography) may be right in arguing that, thus, the meaning of the verb is not very clear. K-G ii. 372 take it as a perfect ('is fixed') and this may be the right interpretation. 

155	περισσά	governing τῶν ἔνδον; not "more excessive than those in the house" (Jebb), but "exceeding those in the house".

τῶν	"masc. of general reference" (Jebb), cf. οἷς 156, although referred only to the two sisters

156	γονᾷ	with ξύναιμος, although of different sort than the dative in μητρὶ... σύναιμος quoted by LSJ

157	οἵα	nominative, to be taken predicatively with the verb; note that this accentuation is provided only by a A and the Triclinian mss (Zc and T); the vulgate interpretations is the adverbial οἷα (acc. adverbialis: 'such as', which would be perfectly acceptable, but much more trivial).

157	ζώει	οἵα... ζώει = οἵα Χρυσόθεμίς ἐστιν, ἣ ζώει, according to Jebb and Kam. Jebb explicitly rejects the interpretation: "considering the manner in which Chr.lives", but this also is very possible. Yet, it is true that, quite apart from the probable ominous silence on Iphigenia's death, the accent for Orestes is on the fact that he *lives, not on how he lives. This relative seems, at first sight, to be loosely attached to τῶν ἔνδον. But this is excluded by the reference to Orestes. It is perhaps better to see it as an adverbial with περισσὰ εἶ.

159	ἀχέων	pace Jebb, it is certainly the genitive of ἄχος, governed by κρυπτᾷ as an ablatival gen, and not the participle of ἀχέων. See the eloquent explanations of Hermann, Kamerbeek and Finglass.

159	,	as Hermann writes, a comma after ἥβᾳ makes serves only those who want to retain the transmitted ὄλβιος (instead of changing it to ὄλβιον with Brunck) and take ἀχέων as a noun. But if we take ἀχέων as a noun, which is certainly better, then the comma has no purpose and should be cancelled. Hermann is again perfectly right in saying that ὄλβος should be taken with what follows: see on it.

160	ὄλβιος	looks forward, not backward, as Finglass rightly argues. He is right therefore in rejecting the traditional interpretation: ἐν ἥβᾳ κρυπτᾷ ἀχέων should not be attached with it ('blessed in a youth removed of all trouble'), but rather with an implied ζώει to be taken by the coordinated relative.

163	Ὀρέσταν "the name is delayed for emphasis" and is therefore "drawn into the case of the preceding relative" (Finglass). Also, the effect by which the name is retained, expanded, and only finally revealed builds up the power that is hidden in the very utterance of a designation; it is a sort of "riddling" of which Aeschylus is very fond (see Fraenkel ad Ag. 681, rightly quoted by Finglass).

164	ἀκάματα	neuter acc. as adverbial

164	τάλαιν'	attribute cumulation in asyndeton is frequent with α-privative adjectives (see F-J&W ad A. Su. 143). Therefore, Kam would take τάλαινα as "subordinate to ἄτεκνος". But it is not very clear what "subordinate" may mean (exclamatory?). It seems impossible to take it in any other way than coordinated predicative with the other attributes.

168	κακῶν	ablatival with ἀνήνυτον (Kamerbeek: 'fate in which my misery finds no end'), rather than epexegetical with οἶτον (Jebb: 'endless doom of woe').

170	ἔρχεται	Hermann takes this sentence as explanation of the preceding ὧν τ' ἐδάη, and relates the "cheated messages" to the plights for return that the sister had sent and that had gone unanswered. But his paraphrase ('mihi mittitur') cannot be extracted from the words. Taking ἐμοὶ with ἀπατώμενον (Kam) does not seem possible: the dative belongs to ἔρχεται.

170	ἀπατώμενον	as Hermann argues, it cannot certainly be taken as active. But there is no question of messages of Electra: see above.

δ'	ποθεῖ, ποθῶν δ'	"contemptuous, as at 319 φησίν γε, φάσκων δ'" (Finglass)

173	μοι	ethic dative with the verb, not possessive (see Moorhouse).

176	νέμουσα,	"'assigning,' or 'committing,' it to Zeus" (Jebb)

177	οἷς	attraction for οὕς: μήθ᾽ ὑπεράχθεο τούτοις οὕς ἐχθαίρεις

187	τεκέων	preserved by two recentiores and independently conjectured by Meineke; τοκέων codd. The paradosis is preserved by Campbell, but the small correction clearly improves the text.

193	οἰκτρὰ	the anaphora is typical of the laments, Finglass (with his note to 88-9)

194	δ'	Finglass rightly dismisses Jebb's idea, that the μέν...δέ articulation points to an actual antithesis of two different cries. No mention of Cassandra's wail (i.e. no direct quotation of Aesch.'s Agamemnon) can be extracted from those lines.

195	οἱ	Hermann, σοι codd. The transmitted text is defended by Campbell. It would identify the αὐδά mentioned as the voice of Electra, already mourning at the moment of Agamemnon's slaughter. That is not only possible, but very much in keeping with the context: Electra's wail begun that day, and, as we were told in the previous stanzas, has continued so far. This would mark a transition to the summary of Agamemnon's death that is narrated in the rest of the parodos. The ethic dative σοι, transferring the act of killing from the victim to the mourner, would be quite strong, but not impossible (see Finglass)

199	μορφάν	what is this "shape" of crime ('sceleris formam', Hermann)? 1. Jebb thinks of an ἀλάστωρ 2. Russell apud Finglass of "the scene of the murder, visualized as a picture".

201	πλέον	"the construction begins as a comparative intensified by πασᾶν [...] but instead of the expected positive form of the adjective to follow πλέον, we instead meet with a superlative". This is Finglass' excellent account of the syntax. Overall, the structure amounts to an over amplification.

203	νύξ	nominative or vocative? Distinction between exclamation and real invocation is often arbitrary (Moorhouse), and both cases are used in both. In fact, it is only when there is a special form for the voc. that is possible to make a clear distinction of cases. In this example, the invocation amounts to a sort of exclamation: nominative is selected.

205	τοὺς	is relative. The only possible way to accept the transmitted text is to take (already with Jebb) θανάτους as the antecedent of τούς and in apposition with ἄχθη; we would need to suppose that θανάτους is not only attracted in the case of the rel., but is also replaced and drawn into the relative clause. This is surely a puzzling construction. But the only alternative is to write τοῖς (with Johnson: Finglass) or οἷς, neither of which is appealing in any way.

214	οἵων	is potentially ambiguous and is explained in different ways: 1. "by what kind of conduct" (Jebb) or "through what courses" (Campbell) 2. "from what good situation" (Schol) 3. denoting the origin of the present circumstances (see below for the punctuation): a. "do you not understand in whose power the present lies", i.e. from what powers (Finglass) b. "from what origins" Ll-J c. "from what kind of words and deeds"

214	παρόντ'	taken by Jebb as acc. of relation; others (see above: point 3) punctuates the sentence after παρόντ', either with a question mark (an interpretation attested already in the Triclinian mss and in A (see Dawe for the list), or with a comma (Dawe). With this punctuation, the τὰ παρόντα becomes the sbj and ἐξ οἵων the nominal predicate (see above for the possible interpretations).

τὰ	the transmitted text, either with the vulgate word division (τὰ δέ) or with the demonstrative τάδε of a minority of codd, is difficult to understand, as the fanciful explanations in the scholia show. The only possible solutions, if one retains it, is Jebb's construction: τὰ = the wars that El. raises everyday are not ἐριστά with the rulers, so as (πλάθειν = resultative infinite) to come in conflict (with them; dative ἀπὸ κοινοῦ or implied from the preceding). For πλάθειν as "approach in conflict" see Finglass, p. 166 n. 16. But this is certainly difficult. Jackson's conjecture (τὰ δὲ - τοῖς δυνατοῖς οὐκ ἐριστὰ - τλᾶθι), accepted by Ll-J and Finglass, may deserve some consideration.

224	ἄτας	is indeed peculiar here; Finglass (and others?) prints Blaydes' ἀχάς.

226	τίνι	1. dativus iudicantis (the definition is by Kam): "in whose eyes" (Jebb) 2. obj of πρόσφορον, as "fitting to whom", "To what person who feels aright would that word be suitable which I should hear (=which would be said of me)" is a paraphrase that Jebb offers to illustrate (and criticize) on of the possible interpretations that goes on this line 3. dative with the verb, denoting the origin, perhaps on analogy of such verb as δέχεσθαι (Kamerbeek). None of these solutions is appealing; perhaps 1 is the best.

228	τίνι	some doubt may arise on how to annotate this structure. The dative complement is taken up anew and expanded at the end of the sentence ('in whose eyes shall I hear a suitable words, in the eyes of which right-minded person'?). Since the complement is not only repeated for emphasis, and since the emphatic element is not only placed in a marked position (the end), but also expanded, so that the sentence is almost starting anew, I opted for the joining of two main clauses, with the second verb unexpressed.

233	ἀλλ᾽	for ἀλλ᾽ οὖν after the rejection of a proposition see Denniston pp. 442-3; οὖν "introduces the notion of essentiality or importance". Frequently (as in this case) a γε follows, which underlines the important part of the new proposition

235	ἄταις	to take it as an instrumental dative (as it may seem possible at first sight; and see Kaibel) would certainly mean to trivialize this passage. In truth, the polyptoton is a chief factor: cf. Ai. 866, πόνος πόνον πόνῳ φέρει, and see Jebb. As the example of the  Ajax makes clear, here the dat. is of interest (Moorhouse): "do not beget new ruin for your ruin", with an additive effect.

236	"for this “καί” prefixed to an indignant question, cp. O.C. 263 (n.)" (Jebb)

239	τούτοις	dativus iudicantis: "the persons who approve such forgetfulness of the dead" (Jebb), "sc. ἐν οἷς τοῦτο ἔβλαστε" (Kam). Perhaps, it is to be taken ἀπὸ κοινοῦ with ξυνναίοιμι.

240	εἴ	not "(may I live contentedly) with any good thing I may have" (Ll-J, approved by Finglass, and on the line of Jebb), but "si je garde au coeur quelque droiture" (Mazon; and cf. Pattoni: "se in me c'è qualcosa di buono"), approved by Kam and with the right parallels.

242	ἐκτίμους	proleptic: 'retain the wings of dirges, so that these shall not pay honour etc.'; "not paying honour to parents: the gen. as with adjectives compounded with α privative (36). For this negative sense of ἐκ in composition, cp. ἔκδικος, ἐξαίσιος, ἔξωρος" (Jebb)

249	τ᾽	suspected, on account of its strange position; τἂν (= τοι ἄν) is often read instead.

251	μέν	"according to Jebb μέν 'merely emphasizes the pronoun'; but perhaps it is better to assume that the wording presupposes a following σὺ δέ, for which εἰ δὲ...σὺ νίκα is substituted" (Kamerbeek)

262	ἔχθιστα	construed with συμβαίνω, as a pure adj. without ὤν of inf.: cf. S. Tr. 1174.

264	κἀκ	"In such phrases “ἐκ” is somewhat more than a mere equivalent for “ὑπό” (124). It suggests the head and fount of authority" (Jebb)

272	ἡμὶν	possessive dative to be joined with κοίτῃ according to Moorhouse. Kam takes it as an ethic dative. But Finglass may be right in joining it with αὐτοέντην, on the account of the fact that αὐθέντης typically governs a sort of dativus incommodi.

272	αὐτοέντην	Lγρ Kγρ, αὐτοφόντην rell. and cf. Phryn. Praep. soph. s.v. αὐθέντης, which attests that Soph. used, instead of the commoner form, the form αὐτοέντης. But Phrynicus may refer only to OT 107 (where it is incontestably the reading), and the variant in the Laurentian mss can have been collated from there as well: see Dawe p. 178. Finglass, who accepts the best attested variant.

275	τλήμων	like ταλαίνην (273) is built on the ambiguity of τλάω (so rightly Finglass): 1. to endure 2. to dare; therefore, it can be used as a form of insult or of sympathy

277	ὥσπερ	"to limit or modify an assertion or apologize for a metaphor, as it were, so to speak [...] frequent with participles" (LSJ); AuxY: cf. Maria Pia Pattoni's excellent Italian translation: "quasi irridendo".

278	εὑροῦσ᾽	can only mean "find out, discover" after investigation (LSJ). This meaning is sarcastically mocked by Dawe 1976 (review of Kamerbeek, Gnomon): "women who murder their husband do not have to institute inquiries to find out what day they did it on". Conjectures were proposed (reviewed by Finglass, who prints the transmitted lesson within daggers), of which ἱεροῦσα (Seyffert, printed by Dawe) seems the best. Yet, curiously, ἐκείνην ἡμέραν εὑρεῖν is exactly what ancient scholars and antiquarians did, until they fixed a date for the event which is preserved by the Scholia. And if Sophocles was writing from this perspective too (i.e. from an aetiological perspective, "outside" the reality of the play)?

283	,	κλαίω, τέτηκα go closely together, forming one group which is further joined to κἀπικωκύω. The asyndeton almost amounts to an endiadys (Kamerbeek) 

287	λόγοισι	"comitative" dative of the accompanying circumstances, as often with λόγῳ, ἔργῳ etc. (Moorhouse); here it goes with the adj. γενναία, and denotes the public recognition, primarily sanctioned by discourses, that professes Clytaemestra as noble. "Supposedly noble" (paraphrase by Finglass) is excellent, even if he is too drastic in writing that "neither 'noble in her professions' or 'spoken of by others as noble' make sense as a description of Clytemnestra".

293	πλὴν	combined with conjunction ὅταν: 'except when' (the annotation of PDT for multiple-word conjunctions have been adopted: πλὴν = AuxY, ὅταν = AuxC). The translation as "mais", "but", "ma" which are often found don't do justice to Helectra's point: "this abuses she says to me"; with the except-clause we would expect a positive exception; in fact, it goes even worse (thus rightly Kamerbeek).

295	βοᾷ	see Kamerbeek's note for the climax in the verbs for Clytaemestra's speech-acts. This description is an anticipation of the altercation between mother and daughter that will soon follow, just like the description of Ajax' reactions in the Ajax is prepares the second half of the first episode.

295	μοι	"αἴτιός τινός τινι being the cause of a thing to a person" (LSJ), but the same construction is also for the primary sense culpable, responsible

296	ἥτις	taking up σόν as if it were σοῦ; Jebb compares OC 731

299	σὺν	can be taken either as adverbial or in tmesis; and in both cases, it can be joined either with ἐποτρύνειν (cf. LSJ s.v. συνεποτρύνω) or with παρών (Kam), as the comparison with Ai. 1288 suggests. But the association of σύν with the main verb seems stronger here, independently from the tmesis.

310	φέρ᾽	with the imperative, as more often in Soph.; with the subj. in Ph. 300 and 1452, and more often in Euripides and comedy. According to Finglass, the imperative is of more solemn style.

ἦ	only here ἦ κάρτα as an independent affirmative; Meineke conjectured the much more usual καὶ κάρτα, which is accepted by Ll-J&W.

313	τυγχάνει	again without ὤν

314	κἂν	Jebb with A and the Triclinians (see Dawe for details of mss); the others have "some articulation or other of ηδαν" (Finglass), which gives in a few manuscripts the interpretation ἦ δ' ἄν or ἦ δἂν (crasis for δή ἄν); note also that L's situation is uncertain (since both reading are visible. More than particle grammar, the problem affects the general interpretation of the sentence: is it a question (like ἦ καί would imply) or a positive statement? The last is certainly preferable (so rightly Kaibel, Kamerbeek and Finglass).

316	τί	the sentence can only have two possible construction: 1. ἱσστόρει· τί σοι φίλον (sc. ἱστορεῖν); 2. ἱσστόρει ὅτι σοι φίλον (sc. ἱστορεῖν), with τι = ὅτι relative. But the status of τι = ὅτι is very disputed (see Jebb's appendix, Kamerbeek and Finglass).

318	ἢ	"The participles explain “τί”, being equiv. to ὅτι ἥξει, ἢ μέλλει”; cp. Aesch. Ag. 271“εὖ γὰρ φρονοῦντος ὄμμα σοῦ κατηγορεῖ" (Jebb); Campbell quotes OT 463 for the variant εἶπε

321	μὴν	adversative καὶ μὴν (Denniston 357-8)

332	κἀμαυτήν	as e.g. in Tr. 2, the sbj of the subordinate clause is anticipated as obj of the main verb; here the structure is complicated by the proleptic τοσοῦτον ('this I know': see Ai. 441 where it is also combined with introductive καίτοι)

333	ἄν	note the repeated ἄν to fill both positions, the second and the one close to the verb.

341	γε	in commentaries (Jebb), but the emphasis is still naturally on δεινόν: see Diggle ad E. Phae. 164.

342	μέλειν	with personal construction; thus the structure of the sentence is easier: σύ is the sbj of both coordinated infinitive

343	σοι	see OT 300

343	τἀμά	= ἐμοῦ: the possessive adj in place of an objective genitive

344	κείνης	κείνῃ G, R in linea; but what is the construction of the gen.? Dawe argues persuasively against the gen. of agent and proposes a gen. of origin. In any case, he prints Page's δίδαγμα in the Teubner edition

345	ἐπειθ'	suspected by many; Dawe, Ll-J&W and Finglass prints ἔπειθ᾽ ἑλοῦ between daggers. ἔπειτα here has a strange inferential force ('then,' 'after that'; i.e., 'such being the case', Jebb) that lacks parallels in Attic; But see Jebb for good Homeric examples.

347	ἥτις	quippe qui, causal relative, as frequently

348	τούτων	gen objecti with μῖσος (masc)

352	ἐπεί	"controversial ἐπεί with imperatives" (Jebb); see Moorhouse 304

356	εἴ	goes with τῷ τεθνηκότι τιμὰς προσάπτειν: see Finglass, who quotes Dover "Greek Popular Morality", 243 and Norden ad Ver. Aen. 6.213.

357	ἡμὶν	ethical dative, which is generally construed with the participle: σὺ δ᾽ ἡμὶν ἡ μισοῦσα = "thou, whom I am asked to regard as hating" (Jebb), "you who would have us to believe that you hate" (Kam)

363	τοὐμὲ	the transmitted text τοὐμὲ μὴ λυπεῖν means: "let me have just enough food so that I do not pain myself". Already the schol. took it to mean: "so that I don't pain myself, as I should certainly do if I were taking sides with the murderers". These meanings have been felt by many to be either too trivial, too inept, or simply incoherent. Dawe (supported by Finglass) points out that paining herself and the other is precisely what Elettra has been doing. Many conjectures have been proposed: see Jebb's Appendix for a list. But conjectures are needless: λυπεῖν does certainly mean "grieve", "annoy" (as in S. Ai. 589) and "so that (with my behavior) I don't grieve myself" is excellent (cf. Pattoni: "il mio unico cibo sarà non dispiacere a me stessa").

365	μητρός	genitive of possession: no need to imply elision of θυγάτηρ or παῖς in Greek (as we must do in mother translations); see Moorhouse 51

369	μηδὲν	sc. εἴπῃς; verbs of prohibition can be omitted: K-G ii 571-2

369	πρὸς	denoting the manner: Bruhn §72.II

370	ἀμφοῖν	either gen with λόγοις or dat. with κέρδος

371	τῆσδε	the same person as the following αὕτη, and probably Chrysothemis

382	ἐκτὸς	governing χθονὸς τῆσδ᾽ ('outside this land'); alterations (with which a few editors have been busy: see Finglass' discussion) are totally pointless. Pointless is also Kam's futile remark that, if by χθών the region were meant, nothing would prevent Orestes from saving his sister. Expulsion from the land is a very common symbolism in Greek penalty.

383	ἐν	ἐν καλῷ = εὔκαιρον, so the Schol.

285	καὶ	"actually", Kam and see Denniston p. 316 IV; so perhaps, not "emphasis[ing] the verb" (Jebb), but as a sentence adverbial with questions (Denniston p. 309-10: "the particle may either (a) simply denote the the speaker requires further information: or (b) more commonly convey an emotional effect of surprise, contempt, and so forth").

385	ποεῖν	"c. dupl. acc., do something to another" (LSJ)

389	ἐλθεῖν	inf. taking up ἐπηράσω of the previous sentence

396	εἰκαθεῖν	Elmsley, εἰκάθειν codd.; doubts exist on the accentuation and grammatical interpretation of these forms in -θ of vowel verbs (σχεθεῖν, εἰκαθεῖν); see Jebb ad OT 561: he holds, quoting Curtius, that in cases such as S. El. 1014 the interpretation as aorists is out of question. Although agreeing with Curtius that an "'a decidedly aoristic force' for such forms as σχεθεῖν and εἰκαθεῖν 'never established itself'", he maintains the tradition aoristic accentuation

399	τιμωρούμενοι	"A woman, speaking of herself in the plur., uses the masc." (Jebb, quoting Ant. 926). Finglass adds that the fem. plur. would mean "we, the women" (see Barret ad E. Hipp. 670-1).

401	ἐπαινέσαι	epexegitc infinitive with τἄπη, although the construction, by the end of the sentence, seems to point rather to take ταῦτα τἄπη ἐπαινέσαι together as subject of πρὸς κακῶν ἐστὶ (Campbell).

405	Everybody (except Kaibel and Kam) shares Jebb's view: '"ποῖ" has better authority than 'τῷ' (cr. n.), but the latter is certainly to be preferred here'. The difference is not very relevant but the variation is generally praised (Finglass).

405	ἔμπυρα	has caused obvious perplexities, since libations (which are later mentioned by Chrysothemis in her reply: μήτηρ με πέμπει πατρὶ τυμβεῦσαι χοάς) have nothing to do with fire; hence, Jackson conjectured δὲ τἄπυρα. But the transmitted text can be taken to mean the offerings that are supposed to  be burnt at the grave; the reference is then a 'pars pro toto', whereas both burned offerings and libations form part of the ritual. Alternatively (and less likely) ἔμπυρα could mean the vases and containers where offerings were burnt (L-S&J, quoting Sokolowski)

406	τυμβεῦσαι	usually "bury", used with acc. and instrumental dat. in Ai. 1063, Ar. Th. 885 (LSJ s.v.); but as Finglass notes, -εύω verbs "have a wide semantic range" (with bibliography).

415	ἀλλὰ	close to the meaning of 'at least', with an implied prothasis: '(you know little,) however tell me this (little)' (Finglass).

418	ὁμιλίαν	πατρὸς ὁμιλίαν = πατέρα ὁμιλοῦντα

423	γενέσθαι	infinitive in a relative oblique sentence, as it is fairly common

424	του	L(ac), G, R et alii accents it as τοῦ; but the sense of the indefinite is certainly required and the construction is not much more difficult.

425	δείκνυσι	cf. schol: τοῖς γὰρ παλαιοῖς ἔθος ἦν ἀποτροπιαζομένους τῷ ἡλίῳ διηγεῖσθαι τὰ ὀνείρατα; as Finglass notes, this may look like an ad hoc notation, if there weren't similar hints at Schol. on OC 477, E. IT 42-3, Val. Fl. 5.329-32.

428	λίσσομαι	this sentence and the next (vv. 428-30) are deleted by Ll-J&W (duce Morstadt), with the approbation of Finglass. Note that the manuscripts are at variance for the attribution: some give them to Chrysothemis, some to Electra. Jebb's arguments for the attribution to Chrysothemis are very eloquent.

429	ἀβουλίᾳ	causal dat.; cf. 398: ἐξ ἀβουλίας πεσεῖν

433	ἀπὸ	is offered only by a group of codd (the A family: Dawe 179-80). The words offers us with two metrical peculiarities: it offers a resolved princeps with one single disyllabic word, and the line yields two resolutions. This is used as an argument either in favor (copists tend to shun away from solutions) or against it (it is very scantly paralleled). But we may agree with Dawe that it is certainly suspected of being a gloss; "here at El. 433 πρός, ἐκ, παρά, τάδε are all possible" (Dawe).

434	κτερίσματ᾽	here distinguished from the libations, and not used as comprehensive term for both type of offering (liquid and solid).

435	ἢ	typically, κρύπτειν governs the instr. dative of the thing with which one hides (i.e. protects, or cover) himself or the others (see the Homeric instances and A. Eu. 461); in S. Ant. 196 τάφῳ κρύψαι is used for Eteocles' funerals, while other instances of dat. with χθονί vel sim. are all in passive. This dative, which has not retained the attention of the critics, can be one of the rare (according to Moorhouse) examples of final-directive (cf. example of Ant: "bury in the tomb", Ll-J).

436	νιν	= αὐτά, a tragic use for which Finglass quotes F-J&W ad A. Su. 729

436	κρύψον	editors (since Jebb, who quotes Od. 9.166; but see also Campbell) talk of a zeugmatic construction, since, logically, the notion in κρύπτειν belongs only to the second leg of the alternative (the ground). Finglass adds another brachylogic coordination between "seing sight and (hearing) voice), PV 21-2 and quotes Bruhn §198.ii and Fraenkel ad Ag. 797-8. Finglass (ad 435-6) also notes that, between the two methods for disposing of unwanted items, the first (i.e. throwing to the winds) is more attested; the only parallel he finds for the other part, significantly, is Ai. 658-9. That the main interest lies on the second part of the coordination, is well shown also by the following sentence, where the attention is totally retained on the offering buried below earth

438	σῳζέσθω	the "sentiment and form" are indeed "paralleled by S. Ai. 660", and "Electra's tone" is indeed "ironical, especially with the predicative κειμήλια" (Finglass); but Finglass misses the point completely, 

439	ἀρχὴν	adverbial, strengthening the negative: "not at all", 'non omnino'.

440	ἔβλαστε	βλαστάνειν = φύειν, as often in tragedy

443	δέξεσθαι	Heath, δέξασθαι codd. Sophocles (and Greek authors in general) uses δοκέω + fut. infinitive, or aor./pres. with ἄν (see Jebb). But there are instances of aor. infinitive for the future: see Dawe for additional examples and add, with Finglass, S. fr. 339 TrGF which counters Dawe's claim that all those cases are of strong aorists. It is wiser not to alter the transmitted text. 

445	κἀπὶ	interpreters share the explanations given by the scholiast for this ritual: the sword is cleansed on the death's head to turn impurity out from the murderer and transfer it to the victim. But what is the meaning of ἐπὶ λουτροῖσιν? 1. Jebb and Kam: 'for', 'with a view to ablutions', ἐπὶ καθάρσει (Kam), i.e. Clytaemestra's own ablution from the polluting blood of her victim 2. Finglass: "'in place of the ceremonial washing', which relatives gave to the corps", i.e. Agamemnon's funeral washing.

446	ἐξέμαξεν	the subject changes abruptly, from ὁ νέκυς to Clytaemestra. But note also, with Jebb, the change of construction: from coordinated relative ('from whom he received the maschalismos, and from whom he received the other outrage'), to an independent clause. Yet, in the annotation, the slight anacoluthon is maintained: the relative and the clause starting with κἀπί are annotated as coordinated

446	ἆρα	according to Denniston (47-8), ἆρα μὴ is not 'num', but points more to an impasse: it implies "merely that the suggestion made is difficult of acceptance" (cf. Pattoni: "credi veramente che i doni che tu porti possano espiare il suo delitto?").

449	κρατὸς	gen. of separation with τεμοῦσα

450	κἀμοῦ	"a possessive genitive, going with 'τήνδ᾽ ἀλιπ. τρίχα" (Jebb). Jebb's punctuation (see the next note) endorses rather a different interpretation, which is reflected in the paraphrase of Kells: 'cutting the end-strand (lit. "foliage") of your hair from your head, and mine too, poor thing that I am'. In this way we should take τρίχα καὶ ζῶμα as a sort of apposition with the idea of offering implied in κἀμοῦ (τεμοῦσα). In its turn, this should be taken as a gen. of separation coordinated with κρατός. But this is surely obscure and almost absurd: how can the belt be in apposition with the notion of gift implied in "cutting from my head"? The syntax is, in any case, quite irregular, with the coordinated idea moved for emphasis before the verb (Jebb).

450	,	the earlier editions (Hermann, and the codd?) have a comma between δὸς αὐτῷ and τήνδ᾽ ἀλιπαρῆ τρίχα, which is printed also by Jebb and Pearson. This comma is needed only if one accepts the syntactic interpretation that is reflected in Kells' paraphrase: see above on 450 κἀμοῦ. If we discard this, as it is right, then the comma should be removed (as it is in the most recent editions).

451	ἀλιπαρῆ	a well known crux: the meaning and the very formation of this word are highly controversial. Already the scholia knew two solutions for the interpretation: 1. ἀλιπαρής = αὐχμηρά (squalid): the adj. should be considered the negative form of λιπαρός 2. scholia knew the variant λιπαρῆ, which was found ἐν ὑπομνήματι ('in a commentary'), which is probably a collection of glosses by Didimus. The meaning would be the opposite of Hermann's solution (see below): ἱκέτιν τρίχα. To these Hermann added a third explanation, that should preserve the vulgate α privative compound: "unfit to beseech" (λιπαρεῖν), 'non accomodata supplicationi'. Solution n.1 was suspected already by Brunck, and the reasons for this skepticism are not light: see Finglass for a very detailed discussion. In particular, two questions have raised a hot debate: (a) are α-privative compound derived from -ρός adjectives, which are generally very rare, possible in Classical Greek? (b) Even if they were, can one of these ends in -ρής, instead of -ρός? Ll-J&W answered a resolute no to both questions. Yet, it is hard to deny that this meaning would suit the context of our play wonderfully, much better than any other proposed. As Finglass tentatively suggests, the extreme rareness of both α-privative compounds from -ρός adj's and of -ρής doublets with -ρός epithetes could be considered in this case rather a warning against excessive reliance on statistics than a counter argument; given the very low numbers, it is possible that ἀλιπαρός existed and it is simply not attested. One must note, though, that, since the ι in λιπαρός is short, if we accept this explanation the addition of a syllable is needed to restore the meter: hence something like Bergk's τήνδε τ' must be read with explanation n.1. As the words stand in Perseus' text, only Hermann's explanation is possible. But this must certainly be ruled out: supplication is, in Greek religion and in Sophoclean tragedy, the last resort of the wretched. The humble offering of hair locks is "the treasure of the suppliants", so that a reference on the other direction would be completely out of place. Dawe (see his apparatus) took a more radical view: instead of suspecting only the adjective, he prints also τρίχα between cruces; his chief mistrust in the transmitted text lies in the fact that "post φόβας et ante ζῶμα expectares non τρίχα sed μίτραν vel sim.". But this also is specious: Helectra's offering is made of hair as well as clothing and it is difficult to take a reference to Electra's hair in the first part of the sentence.

454	αὐτὸν	"himself, rather than simply 'him'" (Jebb). It is a standard features of prayers: Finglass aptly quotes West ad Eur. Or. 1226 and Hes. Op. 2

459	μέλον	Jebb's first hypothesis, that we could take οἶμαι as parenthetic, is impossible. Therefore, only two courses remain: 1. to change the text accepting Blaydes' μέλειν (so I read in Finglass, the conjecture is traditionally attributed to Nauck) 2. to consider a structure like OC 653 (ἀλλὰ τοῖσδ' ἔσται μέλον), but with a nominal sentence in the infinitive (equivalent to εἶναι μέλον); such nominal sentences are rare but not quite impossible

461	σοί	the datives seem to go rather with ἀρωγά than with the verb

464	πρὸς	with acc. denoting manner, as in 369

466	δίκαιον	given that λόγον ἔχειν, both in personal and impersonal construction, means 'it is reasonable' , δίκαιον is perhaps best taken as an acc. of respect. Jebb (with Stinton 1977a: 132) notes that Sophocles tends to place at the beginning of the sentence accusatives that are taken up at great distance; therefore, δίκαιον may be logically considered the obj. of δρᾶν (it could even be annotated as such). The alternative, namely to take τὸ δίκαιον as nom. and subject of λόγον ἔχειν seems natural and is already in the schol. But the meaning of λόγον ἔχειν that it would require ('justice does not afford any ground to', with ἔχει = παρέχει, as Kam writes) is unparalleled.

467	δυοῖν	pace Hermann (who thought about Chrysothemis yielding up the fight against both Chorus and Electra), it can only mean the two sides engaged in the context; so, in this given situation, Electra and Chrysothemis themselves. Therefore, it is best to construe it as a dat. of interest with ἔχει λόγον than with ἐρίζειν as object of the verb ('fight against').

467	ἐπισπεύδειν	suspected (see Ll-J&W, who recovers ἐπισπεύδει from the indirect tradition), or justified by implying a δεῖ from the λόγον ἔχειν; but in truth the construction with the two infinitives coordinated and govern by λόγον ἔχειν does not cause any trouble.

469	πρὸς	frases like πρὸς θεῶν should be annotated as ADV, or with any tag for syntactical interpretation, only when they are governed by a proper verb: e.g. γούνομαί σε etc., 'I pray you for, in the name of' etc. When this verb is missing and they are merely uttered as a self-standing exclamations they should be considered ExD (consistency check needed!)

471	πικρὰν	proleptic-predicative in the meaning of Moorhouse 2, and therefore ATR

471	ἔτι	frequent with menaces or foreboding of evils (see Finglass ad 66). It is halfway between pure adverbial ('in due time') and sentence adverbial, but the temporal value is still strong enough.

476	χεροῖν	it can be either a gen or an instrumental dat.; the meaning will change between "deeds of prowess" and the proper sense of "hands", and both will be fitting in the context. See the two paraphrases offered by Jebb: 'bearing away just triumphs of prowess' (gen with κράτη), 'carrying just victory in her hands' (dat. with φερομένα). The first seems better in line with the meaning of the mid. φέρεσθαι and of κράτη.

479	"subsist, be available" (LSJ); "there is courage in my heart" (Jebb); yet "un fiducioso ardore mi penetra" (Pattoni) is perhaps better, since, as Kam says, is "more expressive than ὑπάρχειν", as the idea of "deepness" of inner feelings seems to imply

480	κλύουσαν	μοι...κλύουσαν, a variation which is not unattested at all in tragic style: cf. A. Pe. 913, Cho. 410 (with Garvie's note), K-G ii.112

483	σ᾽	iam in Wa, addidit Fröhlich; omittunt rell. But the pronoun is needed, and this is surely the best location (pace Wakefield who substituted the σ᾽ for γ') because: 1. it is easy to explain the loss of a σ, due to aplography 2. it is syntactically less ambiguous in his connection with φύσας; an ἀπὸ κοινοῦ with ἀμναστεῖ is far less attractive (both reasons are rightly given by Finglass) 3. the γε with the verb is expressive (Jebb)

495	πρὸ	1. causal: Jebb ('prae'), Moorhouse, Finglass; 2. local in a figurative sense: 'in the face of these things' (Campbell)

495	ἔχει	this sentence has undergone sure corruption, as the variations and the presence of different glosses in the manuscripts clearly show. The manuscripts diverge in two respects: (a) some (LGRZc) omit the first μήποτε (b) some (PGR) offer θάρσος as sbj of μ' ἔχει, but many other mss have θάρσος (vel φόβος, vel ἐλπίς) as a gloss (note that GR belong to both group a and b). There are different solutions to restore the text: 1.  μ᾽ ἔχει μή ποτε μή ποθ᾽ ἡμῖν ἀψεγὲς πελᾶν τέρας (the text of A and the majority of mss) would scan and be in responsion to strophe; in this case, we would have to take πελᾶν as sbj of the expression μ' ἔχει: 'non est omissum hic nomen, quale est ἔννοια, sed illa ipsa cogitatio sequentibus verbis expressa est' (Hermann). This is surely very difficult, if not impossible (see Jebb) 2. reading θάρσος as sbj of μ' ἔχει; e.g. Kam. proposes θάρσος ἔχει με μήποθ' ἡμίν 3. accepting θράσος and expunging μ'ἔχει as intruding gloss, made to soften the bold nominal sentence. This last solution, based on Wunder's intuition that θράσος may be genuine (see the schol: θαρρῶ), is suggested by Dawe and favored by Finglass. It seems by far the best between the three because it: a. preserve the geminated negation which is very expressive (pace Kam) b. preserve θάρσος that looks authentic from all perspective (see Finglass) c. explains the mss situation quite neatly

508	εὖτε	"'sinceì,=ἐξ οὖ, like ὅτε" (Jebb); according to Fraenkel (on Ag. 306-8), 'in Tragedy εὖτε with the aorist indicative, where the meaning is temporal and not causal, normally means "from the time when"'. Picked up by ἐκ τοῦδε? See on 514 οἴκου

511	αἰκίαις	dative of the accompanying circumstances (see Moorhouse)

514	ἔλειπεν	PGR, ἔλιπεν. Certainly, Jebb's explanation for the imperfect ('was never yet absent from the house') is not convincing: see Kamerbeek. Dawe keeps the imperfect (1976: 232) and translates: 'has never looked like leaving'; others (West 1982, Ll-J&W, Finglass) choose the aorist instead, since 'leaving is a punctual action' (Finglass). The construction of the verb depends on the choice between οἴκου and οἴκους (see next note): 1. transitive with the acc. 2. intransitive with the gen. (λείπειν ἐκ οἴκου; cf. the double construction of the English 'leave').

514	οἴκου	from Dawe's apparatus: οἴκους Lac Vac R, T in linea, forasse etiam Cac Oac Gac; οἴκου T sub linea, rell. It is not an easy choice, since both can stand and corruption may be imagined in both direction as reasonably and both construction of λείπειν are quite acceptable. But the structure of the sentence changes sensibly with either variant: 1. with the gen., οἴκου goes with ἐκ τοῦδε, which is in its turned governed by ἔλειπεν; εὖτε, then, is = ἐξ οὖ ('since', AuxC attached to the main verb; ἐκοιμάθη = ADV). 2. with the acc. οἴκους (obj. of the verb ἔλειπεν), εὖτε = 'when': AuxC attached to ἐκ τοῦδε ('from that time, when Myrsilus lied etc) governing ἐκοιμάθη as ATR. Finglass may be right when he writes that the gen. provides us with a fine deictic that points to the scenic building.

516	ἀνειμένη	'on the loose', 'unrestrained', It. 'a briglia sciolta'; here the perfect part. is almost an adjective so I construe it as predicative with the verb

522	ἄρχω	1. "rule", absolute and with a comma after it (Hermann, followed by most) 2. with the participle καθυβρίζουσαν (Brunck's edition, Kaibel, Kamerbeek): 'I am the first at abusing, i.e. I begin the quarrels. As Jebb points out, 1 is certainly to be preferred.

525	πατὴρ	a comma should be printed between ἀεί and ὡς (as in Dawe and Finglass), so that the construction becomes clearer: πατὴρ, οὐδὲν ἄλλο ('your father, and nothing else'; pace Finglass, I call it a coordination, not an apposition) is the sbj of the nominal sentence ('is your pretext every time'); but πατὴρ is proleptically the subject of the clause ὡς ἐξ ἐμοῦ τέθνηκεν, which picks the main subjects up by the end of the sentence in a typically Sophoclean manner (see above on 466, Stinton's remarks about the opening acc.). So the flow of the sentence is, by the end, "your father, (the fact) that he died by my hand, is your pretext all the time". See next note for another possible interpretation of this sentence.

525	,	the comma between ἄλλο and σοὶ should be kept. Campbell ingeniously proposed to read the sentence without it and to take οὐδὲν ἄλλο , σοὶ πρόσχημ᾽ ἀεὶ as a parenthesis. But then the initial πατήρ is left without any construction, and he is force to suppose that the broken syntax make the "main sentence, as it proceeds" to become "subordinated to the parenthesis". This contorted syntax is ingenious, but not necessary.

527	τῶνδ᾽	objective gen.

528	γὰρ	eloquently defended and explained by Finglass. It implies a slight (logical) ellipsis: "I can't deny (527) [and I won't deny it]. For..."

529	ᾗ	who? Justice, as Jebb and Kamerbeek reads it?

532	ἴσον	formally, an internal object. We may be uncertain whether this value is still felt here, or if the construction is already trivialized as that of a normal adverbial. The syntax is rather strained: ἴσον governs both the dat. ἐμοί and the ὥσπερ clause, which takes up the pronoun after the subordinate sentence ὅτ' ἔσπειρε.

533	ὅς	Storr (following Dindorf?), ὅτ' (= ὅτε) codd.; perhaps the conjecture was made to ease the syntax, but it is completely useless.

543	τίνων	τοῦ χάριν codd, dein τίνος L(ac) s.l., L(pc)GRADXrXsZr, et hoc in aut ex τίνων corr. V(1), om. H, τίνων L(ac) in lin., D i. m., rell [Note: Dawe's apparatus is copied here, because the situation is not very clear, especially for L; verification with the ms can be needed]. Very disputed. The singular pronoun does not yield acceptable sense. Some (Campbell) take τίνων as participle, but that would require a different construction, since, as Jebb puts it, "τοῦ χάριν τίνων; could mean only, 'paying a debt of gratitude for what?' They could not mean, 'paying a debt of gratitude to whom?'". Two options remain: 1. to accept Jebb's and Kaibel's bold interpretation of double question: "wherefore, to please whom"; which it is better to take as a case of sudden change or auto-correction from Clytaemestra (but the parallels for such idiosyncratic construction are lacking), than as a question porting on different interrogative particles, as it is often the case with Greek questions  2. to accept (with Pearson, Dawe and Ll-J&W) Schmalfeld's τοῦτο τοῦ χάριν.

537	ἀντ'	1. 'because of', 'for the sake of' (Finglass; Moorhouse 99) 2. 'in his stead,' i.e. 'to save him from slaying his child'. But 1 is certainly better: see Finglass

538	τἄμ᾽	note the neuter for a person, not in a contemptuous tone: Moorhouse 14-5, Bruhn §4

541	ἧς	gives a puzzling construction after πατρὸς καὶ μητρὸς ὄντας. The parallelism is broken and the syntax concentrates only on Helen, with no more about Menelaos.

543	δαίσασθαι	"epexegetic infinitive after a genitive" (Finglass, who quotes Bruhn §127.ii); the construction is well illustrated by Kam: the gen. are dependent on ἵμερον, while "πλέον, to be constructed with ἢ, goes with the phrase τιν᾽ ἵμερον ἔσχε".

545	Μενέλεω	i.e. ἐνῆν (πόθος τῶν) Μενέλεω (παίδων)

549	πεπραγμένοις	causal dat. (Jebb)

551	σχοῦσα	may give raise to ambiguity, both for punctuation and syntactic annotation: 1. with σχοῦσα governed by δοκῶ and comma after the participle: "and if I look to you like I have no sense (though being right), then go on blaming the others"; 2. taking σχοῦσα with ψέγε and putting comma after κακῶς: "first attain to a just view of the matter, and then, but not sooner, blame thy neighbours" (thus Jebb). From Schol. on, the greatest part of the interpreters goes with n.2. Jebb rightly justifies this view with the normal sense of the aor: "come to have, acquire"; with n. 1 we should expect ἔχουσα.

552	μ᾽	as often, the subj of the subordinate is anticipated as obj of the main clause

553	εἶτα	between temporal adv and sentence adverbial

557	ἐξῆρχες	with double acc. (person addressed and dir. object of the verb) as in E. Tr. 152: "the accusative μ' is possible because in λόγους ἐξῆρχες the idea προσεγόρευες is implied" (Kam).

559	ἂν	note the redoubled ἄν: see on 333 (conventionally, I annotate both as AuxY with the verb).

560	λέξω	"performative" future (with verb of 'saying' denoting a scenic action that is about to take place and will consist in a speech act)

ἐροῦ	with double acc. (LSJ s.v. A5), as early as in Odissey; frequently (LSJ A6) τινὰ περί τινος (the comma between the two obj's, although frequently placed, is not meaningful).

563	δὲ	with the imperative

563	ποινὰς	"acc. in appos. with the sentence" (Jebb)

570	τυγχάνει	the construction is ambiguous, on account of the many participles. 1. τυγχάνει ἐκκομπάσας τι ἔπος (Jebb): "he chanced to utter a certain (irreverent) boast", with βαλών as circumstantial ('after hitting'); 2. τυγχάνει βαλών as in Il. 15.581: 'he hits in the shooting', with ἐκκομπάσας circumstantial ('after uttering a vaunt'); note the difference in the situation described: the vaunt, with n.2, precedes the shooting, while it follows it with n.2; 3. τυγχάνει βαλών τι ἔπος: 'he chanced to utter a (boastful) word', again with ἐκκομπάσας circumstantial ('taunting'). All the accounts of the legend in the scholia or mythographers tell that Agamemnon's boast consisted in the proud statement that not even Artemis would have shot the deer so skillfully; they can be said, therefore, to support n.1 (thus Jebb).

573	adverb used as PNOM, "instead of ὧδ̓ εἶχε or τοιαῦτα ἦν" (Jebb)

578	κεῖνον = Menelaos; Agamemnon is of course the sbj. ἔδρα and ταῦτα refers to Iphigeneia's slaughter

580	τιθῇς	subjonctive; the varia lectio τίθης (indicative) is also attested.

582	εἰ	as Jebb pointed out, the two protases (εἰ... κτενοῦμεν and εἰ δίκης τυγχάνοις) are subordinated one to the other: 'If that is to be the rule, then (if you got your due) you would die', for which Ai. 782-3 is a perfectly matching example (Jebb). Note the difference in mood and tense: 1st protasis with the fut. ind.; second one (and apodosis) potential optative (+ ἄν in the apodosis).

584	τίθης	note the indicative

592	λαμβάνεις	is rather lame in meaning: "you have taken this (the wedding with Aegistus and the new children) as a compensation". The mss vary between λαμβάνεις and τυγχάνεις, while L ac is unrecoverable and Λ may perhaps (see Dawe's and Ll-J&W's apparati) have λαγχάνεις. This last is prudently approved by Finglass.

606	χρῇς	Wunder; χρή codd

609	σχεδόν	σχεδόν τι = "I dare say" (LSJ); sentence adv. used as "pointed understatement" (Finglass).

610	πνέουσαν	It is not clear whom these words are referred to, though it is quite safe to assume that the Choripheus is the speaker. 3 solutions have been proposed: 1. Clitaemestra 2. Electra 3. first one and then the other. No evidence seems conclusive, but perhaps n.3 is rightly regarded as the least probable.

611	οὐκέτ᾽	its meaning is debated: 1. 'no longer' (standard) 2. 'not the further, and perhaps expected, step' (i.e. 'this is a further point that I cannot make out'), Dawe ad OT 105. The meaning has of course some consequences on the interpretation: if it is 'no longer', than it fits perfectly with Electra.

614	ταῦτα	καὶ ταῦτα, 'and that too', is a stereotyped adverbial phrase which serves almost as a conjunction to put emphasis on a word

620	βίᾳ	redundant modal dative at the end of the line and of the sentence

625	εὑρίσκεται	"finds for itself"; the middle "emphasizes the very close relation between subject and object" (Kam) and it's very similar to the simple active.

626	οὐ	note the repeated negative: οὐ... οὐκ. Often with oath formulas and μὰ + name of a deity (cf. Jebb)

627	θράσους	gen. with a verb denoting expiation (ἀλύξεις); here it is used not for the penalty, but for the offense, in a sort of a condensed expression (i.e. to pay the fee for your impudence: see Finglass)

628	ἐκφέρῃ	"Pass., to be carried beyond bounds" (LSJ, s.v. III)

628	μεθεῖσά	is indeed difficult, since the verb normally means "let go", "release", not "allow"; here there is no hint of movement toward an object, which is present when the verb approaches this last meaning (Finglass). H reads παρεῖσα, which, although probably a mere conjecture, is preferred by Dawe and Finglass. Ll-J&W prints the transmitted text, but alter μοι into με.

630	οὔκουν	with fut., in impatient questions: Denniston p. 431; a "colloquialism" according to Finglass

634	παροῦσά	articular nominative instead of the voc. (cf. Moorhouse 25): cf. Ar. Ra 521, Pl. Symp. 218b5-7

637	κλύοις	potential optatives which express command and exhortation are typically present (Ant 444, and 1419). Yet, when the imperative is used, the aorist is chosen for the introductory exhortation to hear the prayer (cf. Garvie ad Cho 5 with bibliography). 

638	κεκρυμμένην	'here="αἰνιγματώδη", covert in meaning, though spoken aloud' (Jebb); Finglass has a very good note on the fact that this prayer, with his supposedly clever concealed phrasing, is in fact ambiguous and disastrous in its outcome: Apollo (who favors Orestes, as we know from the prologue) will grant every request, but with an apposite meaning as it was intended by Clytaemestra.

641	πολυγλώσσῳ	Hesych. testifies that the glossa παλιγγλώσσῳ was used in Sophocles. I am not sure that the sense 'ill-omened' would be unsuitable here, as Jebb and Finglass maintain. Yet the word could very well be taken from other contexts, and it is true that the frequency of Electra's quarrels is a major topic of contention with her mother

644	δισσῶν	it means 'ambiguous' here as in few other places (cf. Fraenkel ad Ag. 122-3, and Finglass ad loc), though its normal meaning would be 'double dream'.

647	ἔμπαλιν	"ἔμπαλιν μέθες, retro mitte, ‘allow to recoil’ upon them" (Jebb)

651	ἀμφέπειν	the second imperative (which governs the imperative) is omitted: see Finglass ad 72 with bibliography; here δός can be supplied mentally

653	εὐημεροῦσαν	depends on ξυνοῦσαν: adverbial participle modifying an adverbial participle!

653	τέκνων	seems partitive in its meaning (τούτοις τῶν τέκνων), rather than attracted into gen. by the rel. pron. The following gen., though the presence of "adjacent genitives in such different senses" is certainly "awkward" (Finglass), should be take as ablatival. Thus Jebb (and Kam with the partitive gen). Finglass reads τέκνοις (Fröhlich), although tempted (with OC 1226-7 as a fitting parallel) by the hypothesis of the attraction.

663	κυρῶ	with part. pred: "hit the mark, i.e. be right in saying"; this construction is frequent with τυγχάνω

664	πρέπει	"to be conspicuously like, resemble", with ὡς or ὥστε, LSJ s.v. II; this construction is annotated as PNOM + AuxY

665	ἥδε	"yonder (ἥδε) is she for whom you ask" (Jebb)

666	ὦ	with χαίρειν in the address formula. Rightly (pace Stanford ad Ai. 91), Finglass writes that the "usage is not confined to any one register": this is the right way to read Fraenkel's note ad Ag. 22.

666	σοὶ	the dative, expanded by Αἰγίσθῳ θ᾽ ὁμοῦ at the end of the sentence, is syntactically ambiguous: 1. proper dat. with φέρων 2. with ἡδεῖς (and less strongly with φίλου). Link 1 is, of course, the strongest with σοι; but, as the sentence reaches the end, n. 2 seems stronger with the second dative Αἰγίσθῳ..

676	λέγω	with pred. part.; not very frequent: see Fraenkel ad Ag 269, Moorhouse 318

679	τρόπῳ	the dat. of circumstances (manner) is rightly commented by Finglass: "since a messenger typically gives the main point of his news immediately, his speech is normally concerned not so much with what happened as with how it happened. It is thus often prefaced with a πῶς question from the recipient of the news".

681	γὰρ	marking the beginning of a narrative after someone has stated his intention of giving or receiving informations: Denniston 59. In Eur. ἐπεί is frequent in this use: see Finglass' note.

682	ἀγῶνος	epexegetic genitive: 'the glory that consisted in the games"

683	κηρυγμάτων	as transmitted, is the object of ᾔσθετ᾽, while ἀνδρὸς προκηρύξαντος depends on it a possessive gen. But 'when he heard the proclamation of a man who had proclaimed' is absurd, as Finglass points out; even if the aorist participle could be coincident with the main verb, 'the proclamations of a man who was proclaiming' is still quite lame. Finglass may be right in accepting Earle's ὀρθίῳ κηρύγματι.

686	τἀφέσει	Jebb (duce Musgrave, qui τῇ 'φέσει conj.), τῇ φύσει codd. The paradosis is explained by the schol as ἐπὶ τῇ μορφῇ οὕτως καὶ ἐπὶ τῷ ἔργῳ ἐφάνη: he equaled the outcome of the race to his nature, i.e. he proved to be at the high of his appearance by winning the race. This explanation is defended by Campbell, Kaibel, Mazon, Fraenkel ad Ag. 637, Kamerbek and Finglass. τἀφέσει would mean: 'having made the starting point of the race coincide with the end', an elaborate periphrasis to say 'having completed the race'.

688	παῦρά	as it stands, ἐν πολλοῖσι (partitive) παῦρά means 'to say the fewest words amidst many things (that should be said)'. Many have suspected it and altered to a much more intelligible antithesis: Bergk and Nauck's ἐν παύροισι πολλά is the most fortunate.

688	λέγω	the construction and morphological interpretations are liable to ambiguity and the sentence seems to condense different ideas (see Kam). 1. χὤπως λέγω (sbj.) = final, 'to tell in brief' 2. χὤπως λέγω (ind.): indirect question with οἶδα, 'I don't know how to say  the victories and the deeds of him in brief'; Jebb objects against 2 that with this interpretation the construction of παῦρα becomes quite strange: as it is, it would more naturally mean: 'I do not know how to describe his deeds as few'.

690	ὅσων	attraction, for ὅσα

691	νομίζεται	line 691 is not acceptable on many grounds: 1. metrically 2. semantically: δίαυλος is "a species of the genus δρόμος, and δρόμος one of the component parts of the πένταθλον" (Kam); also, the plural δίαυλοι is not justifiable (Jebb) 3. syntactically : what is the construction of those words? As Kam writes, the line "seems either a conflation of more or less scholarly speculations on the question which ἆθλα were meant (if Sophocles' text did not have anything between 690 and 692) or the sad result of glosses or comments intruding inot the original text and finally ousting most of it". This comment points to two solution: 1. amending/excruciating line 691 (Dawe prints the transmitted text with cruces) 2. expunging the line, with Lachmann (thus Finglass; Dawe (1st) and Ll-J&W attribute deletion to Porson). For this last option see on 692

692	τούτων	as it stands after Lachmann's deletion of line 691, it is a neuter plural which refers to the general group of contexts. Many have found fault with this. Jebb finds it 'too vague' and approves Tournier's ἄθλων; Nauck leaves δρόμων of 691 and deletes τούτων with the rest of the preceding line. But this is surely unsatisfactory.

694	ὄνομα	acc. of respect: 'sc. ἀνακαλούμενος' (Moorhouse 43)

697	ἂν	again repeated, but this time not for tension between second-position and modal particle. For the repeated ἂν after negative Finglass quotes F-J&W ad Supp. 771.

697	ἰσχύων	sbj participle without τις

698	ἱππικῶν	"prob. neut." Jebb

709	ἵν᾽	Nauck, ὅθ' codd (= ὅθι); but ὅθι in tragedy is always in lyric and never elided; therefore, two other options are possible: 1. to defend both the form and the elision as Homerism (Kam, Finglass; and cf. ὕπαι and ὁμοκλήσαντες in the following lines); 2. to read ὅθι σφιν with Kaibel (Dawe) or ὅθεν σφιν with Diggle (Ll-J&W). N.1 is the best option, although Kaibel's conjecture also accounts well for the paradosis. Nauck's solution, on the contrary, should be avoided

710	κλήροις	C s.l., codd; κλήρους C, followed by many edd (conj. Wunder). But the paradosis is supported by many Homeric parallels: see Finglass

713	ἐν	can be interpreted as: 1. adverbial 2. tmesis. ἐμμεστόω is not attested, but one the only two examples of ἐμμεστός is in Soph. (fr. 314.289)

715	φορεῖθ᾽	imperfect without syllabic augment: -αι is not elided in tragedy. Finglass has a good defense of Page's view that anaugmented past forms, frequent in Messenger's speeches, are an epicism, and are not simply metrically conditioned.

718	βάσεις	τροχῶν βάσεις = τροχοὺς βαίνοντας: cf. Long 100 n. 130
 
720	ἔχων	the implied obj. is τοὺς ἵππους

726	τελοῦντες	difficult on two accounts: a) πῶλοι are typically feminine; the masc examples of Jebb are all in the sing (there is a very strange difference in gender behavior for horse name in sg and pl: see Finglass ad 703-4); b) it should have two different meanings with ἕκτον ('finishing') and ἕβδομόν δρόμον ('entering upon'), both possible by a generic use in the sense of 'doing'. To overcome (a) Musgrave conj τελούντος which is accepted by Finglass. For (b) two solutions where proposed: 1. Blaydes took καί to mean a generic ἤ: 'the sisth or the seventh' 2. one of the chariot could have been one turn ahead of the other (this seems the least likely option)

732	κἀνοκωχεύει	codd have the form κἀνακωχεύει, which is also printed by some editors (Storr among them, whose text is reproduced in Perseus). This is the form that codd give for Thuc. and Hdt. But ancient testimonia (P.Oxy 16 and Ael. Dion. Attika Onomata α 144, quoted by Finglass) seem to suggest that this situation is due to textual corruption. Etymology, that relates the word to an old perfect ὄκωχα of ἔχω (cf. Il. 2.218, where it is Cobet's restoration).  Finglass conclusion seems quite reasonable: "the remarks of the later grammarians [i.e.: of those who argued that there were differences between the two words, like [Ammon.] De adf. voc. diff. 46] are an attempt to deal with a situation where textual corruption has created the α-vocalism forms alongside the originals". Yet his other conclusion, that "it does not seem plausible that in the fifth century there were two sets of forms, with the same meaning, differing only in a single word" is too rash. We do not know for certain how the situation was. Everyday examples can tell us that we may indeed use different forms of the very same word. The form with ο-vocalism is also preserved by the Suida s.v.

734	δ᾽	is transmitted by some rec. codd., but omitted by all moder editors. Its meaning, as Jebb (who ultimately rejects it) writes, would be: 'last, indeed, but last by his own choice'. But the opposition of the μέν is certainly in the following sentence

740	προβάλλων	'in partitive apposition' (Jebb), i.e. in the distributive construction (ἄλλος / ἄλλοτε) formally governed by a dual verb.

740	ὀχημάτων	(1) either with κάρα ('the head of the chariot'), thus Campbell and Finglass (2) or with προβάλλων: 'showing his head in front of the (two) chariots' (Jebb, Kam). The scene changes with either interpretation: with n.1 the two chariots alternately take the lead; with n.2 the charioteers alternately rush forward, with their head bent over their chariot (as in many vase depictions). But n.1 seems more to the point in the context

742	ὡρμᾶθ᾽	printed by Storr (Dindorf?); ὠρθοῦθ' codd. The paradosis is clearly right: it makes not only a highly rhetorical polyptoton (Jebb), but a peculiar schema (like Ai. 866) of three related words in a line (Kam, Finglass)

742	ἐξ	(1) spatial (Bruhn, Anhang §68 II) (2) condition: 'with his chariot safe' (Jebb)

743	λύων	thus the codd; there is dispute on whether the accident can be caused by Orestes loosening the left reins or on the contrary whether Orestes should not have tightened this rein to actually crush on the pole. Finglass prints Toepfler's ἐπεὶ τανύων (cf. Il. 23.324), which is almost no conjecture, but a different interpretation of the paradosis.

746	ἐν	Nauck, σύν codd; both are in tmesis with the verb

753	τέ	in Storr's text, reproduced by Perseus, ἔστε is written separated for no particular reason

758	σποδοῦ	'σποδοῦ is related to the genitive of definition, denoting what the body now consists of' (Finglass).

760	ἐκλάχῃ	found in two recc. (JS), ἐκλάχοι alii. The subjunctive is natural with φέρουσιν. But the opt. is understandable as determined by the reference to the past implied in the command, as if τεταγμένοι φέρουσιν =  ἐτάχθησαν φέρειν (thus Campbell).

760	χθονός	a partitive genitive: 'a tomb cut from his father's land', i.e. 'in his land'

763	ὡς	limitative: cf. Ai. 95

764	δεσπόταισι	for the dat., Finglass refers to Diggle PCPhS 1974: 14 (= Euripidea 1994: 105)

766	ταῦτα	F quotes Stevens 1976 and CQ 1945 on such ellipses as possible colloquialisms

770	τέκῃ	subj without ἄν: Goodwin  §540, K-G ii 426 anm. 1; Bruhn §144 III (all quoted by Fing)

773	μάτην	"μάτην λέγοις, say the word μάτην: cp. Ant. 567: ἀλλ᾽ ἥδε μέντοι μὴ λέγ'" (Jebb)

781	ἡδύν	the separation between head and adj, which are split on the two side of the clause, can also make it predicative (ATV; Finglass)

781	ἀλλ᾽	one would look in vain for comments on the shift from ὥστε + inf to indicative, or on alternative punctuations to this sentence (cf. Dawe).

793	ὧν	(1) either neut: 'she listened to what (i.e. the prayers) she ought to listen' (2) or masc./fem. pl.: 'she listened to the person (i.e. me and not you') whom she had to' (thus Finglass)

795	οὔκουν	there is debate among the edd. on the accentuation of the particle and punctuation of the sentence

817	εἴσειμ᾽	Hermann, ἔσσομαι codd; which is against the meter. The other solution is to transpose copula and epithet: ἔσομαι ξύνοικος (Dawes); Storr's comma is, in any case, not clear 

837	γὰρ	Denniston 80, number 7

838	κρυφθέντα	"was entombed" (Fing), who quotes Pi N. 9.24-5, [Apollod.] 3.6.8, Ephor. FGrHist 70 F 96; κρύπτω therefore is used quite consistently for this episode of katabasis.

845	ἐδάμη	completing the previous sentence of the Chorus (Finglass)? Or interrupting it with a different thought (Kam)? The latter seems more convincing to me, pace Finglass. In any case it is better to split the sentence in the treebank

851	πολλῶν	Jebb already lists the two options for the governing of the gen's: 1. with πανσύρτῳ in active sense: πάντα σύροντι τὰ κακά (Schol); 2. with αἰῶνι, as a gen. epexegeticum ('a life which consists in a multitude of dreadful and hateful woes')

851	αἰῶνι	Hermann, ἀχέων codd. As Finglass writes the transmitted text has 2 problems: 1. the dat. adj's lack a governing noun 2. ἀχέων doesn't scan. The dat. is of cause: '(I know this) by a life which etc.' (Jebb).

872	μολεῖν	final-consecutive infinitive, governed by a verb of motion; rightly Finglass quotes v. 406 πέμπει τυμβεῦσαι

882	ἐκεῖνον	This second “ἀλλά” merely opposes its clause to the former: ‘I do not say this in mockery, but report him as (really) present’ (Jebb)

οὖν	as in Tr. 391 and passim, annotated as AuxY (δέ) + AuxZ (οὖν); Finglass: "the particles are almost invariably preceded by σύ or ὁ (ἡ, οἱ), and the expression nearly always forms the opening of a speech".

891	λόγῳ	"causal dat., since εἴ σοί τις ἡδονή (ἐστιν)=εἴ τι ἥδει" (Jebb)

892	δὴ	καὶ δή as in 317 (AuxY + AuxY, both with main verb): Denniston 250 and Finglass

903	ψυχῇ	ambiguously placed: 1. with ἐμπαίει (which would then take a double dat., one perhaps possessive: 'upon my soul', LSJ); thus Jebb 2. with σύνηθες and perhaps ἀπὸ κοινοῦ (Finglass). This seems a little easier (although the psychological arguments of Finglass don't have much value)

911	γε	causal (AuxY?)

913	ἀλλ'	see Tr. 1128 for ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ μὲν δὴ (and Denniston 395)

920	ἀνοίας	with Storr's punctuation it's a gen of cause; it could also be an exclam. gen (see Moorhouse 70-2)

924	τἀκείνου	codd, τἀκ κείνου Canter, which gives a better construction for the sense required (accepted by Dawe and Finglass); Jebb (who keeps the paradosis) interprets it as an objective gen., 'such means of deliverance as he could afford, —like “ἐλπίδες τινός”, hopes from one'.

932	μάλιστ'	"as the most probable explanation" (Jebb): Ph. 617, OC 1298

934	δυστυχής	most likely Chrysothemis (Jebb and Kam: sc. ἐγώ) than Orestes

940	ποτέ	in astonished question

943	τλῆναί	constructed with predicative part as in A. Th. 754

943	ἃν	crasis: ἅ + ἄν

950	ἔτ᾽	Reiske; βίῳ θάλλοντα τ᾽ εἰσήκουον codd. Hermann defended the transmitted text by taking βίῳ = ἐν βίῳ ὄντα

954	κατοκνήσεις	the most widely attested lesson κατοκνήσῃς (of all codd but CAD), which would turn the ὅπως-clause into a final, is clearly a lectio facilior. With the fut. ind. the clause is the obj., which states the content of the appeal implied in εἰς σὲ δὴ βλέπω

958	ποῖ	ἀντὶ εἰς τίνα χρόνον (Schol.): cf. Ar. Lys 526

962	ἄλεκτρα	"The internal accusative of a neuter adjective or pronoun may take the place of a noun, and so provide an adverbial equivalent. E. 962 άλεκτρα γηράσκουσαν 'spending an unmarried old age' (άλ. = άλεκτρον γήρας, or * άλέκτρως (not attested))" (Moorhouse 41)

962	γηράσκουσαν	note the change to the acc., after ἐστερημένῃ (cooncordated with the initial ᾗ)

966	πημονὴν	either 1. acc. in apposition to the clause γένος βλαστεῖν or 2. apposition to the obj. γένος ('yours or my descendant, a sure punishment to him')

999	δαίμων	(divinely apportioned) fortune (Finglass ad 971 for its association with El's fate): it is the subject of all verbs

1023	ἦ	Elmsley, ἦν codd. Though inscriptions have the vulgate forms, ἦ is preferred in Soph.: see Barret ad E. Hipp. 700

1030		κρῖναι	"Since μακρὸς here implies 'long enough,' an inf. can go with it as with 'ἱκανός, δυνατός', etc." (Jebb)

1040		κακῷ	the acc. is attracted to the dat by the rel. pronoun

1061		ἵσας	"sc. μοίρας", Jebb

1066	βροτοῖσι	'a dative of interest, giving "Rumor who takes a message on behalf of mortals' (Finglass); the alternatives are: 1. ethic dative, 'denoting those who perceive the φάμα' (Jebb) 2. taking βροτοί as opposed to τεθνηκότες ('the livings') and as a possessive dat.: 'that brings the voice of the living (to the deads)'

1070	δή	Triclinius, omittunt rell.; δή is considered 'tolerable' by Jebb, but discarded as a meaningless filling by the other editors. A and other recc. have νοσεῖται (accepted by Dain and Ll-J&W), but the middle is not entirely convincing; Kam, Dawe and Finglass put the cruces.

1075	τὸν	if we retain the transmitted text, then ellipse of χρόνον (cf. Schol.) is more probable than the omission of a direct object like e.g. στεναγμόν (Bruhn, Wilamowitz ad E. HF 681, Kaibel). Yet corruption is far from improbable and the proper name Ἠλέκτρα is a plausible candidate. Among the conjectures Heath's 

1083	νώνυμος	proleptic, predicative

10876κοινὸν	pace Finglass, it seems sound. The reference can be general and need not to be limited to Chrisothemis or anyone else (thus Campbell, even though this consolatory topos can be thought as misplaced here). Alternatively, and perhaps better, it can be interpreted as Kamerbeek does, being = κοινωνόν ('as a companion').

1086	εἵλου	pace Finglass and Most, a reference to El.'s choice is very well in place. The linguistic difficulty that Finglass finds (agreeing and continuing Most) is not really relevant: "there we have an aorist participle in coordination with the verb εἵλου, which means that the verb ought to denote some action either contemporary or subsequent with the participle. This is not possible if it refers to Electra's original choice of a life of mourning". This is not true. It is entirely possible that by τὸ μὴ καλὸν καθοπλίσασα the Chorus referes to all the course of Electra's action, from the choice of her life of mourning (which is after all an 'offensive weapon' against her father's killers: see Lauraux) to her last decision to take action against her enemies.

1087	μὴ	the negative is the 'subjective' μή, not οὐ. It can only refer to what is morally despised, like in Ant. 370 (Kam, also the schol. rightly paraphrases it as αἰσχρόν). I would tend to retain it and deal rather with the following καθοπλίσασα (see).

1087	καθοπλίσασα	one of the most challenging cruces in Soph. The verb means 'to arm', 'to equip'; the most immediate meaning we get is: 'to clad what is wrong in full armour', 'equip what is wrong'; notwithstanding the opinion of distinguished scholars (like Hermann, Stinton, MacLeod), it cannot mean to endeavor the matricide. I agree with Jebb and Kamerbeek (pace Finglass): the meaning we need is 'reject', 'rebut', like the scholiast saw when he glossed the verb with καταπολεμήσασα. It seems impossible to get this sense out of the transmitted καθοπλίσασα.

1095	βεβῶσα	"in pf., stand or be in a place", LSJ: cf. 1056-7

1096	note the strained syntax: the antecedent of the relative pronoun (νόμιμα) is attracted into the rel. clause and then taken up by 'its "postcedent" τῶνδε' (Kam).

1096	τῶνδε	taken as a causal gen. by almost all the modern editors (Jebb, Kam, Finglass); taking it with ἄριστα would make the noun equivalent to ἀριστεῖα, a meaning considered as impossible by Jebb.

1101	Αἴγισθον	the sbj of the interrogative clause is proleptically anticipated (OBJ_AP)

1101	πάλαι	not necessary referring to a brief time span: it can point rather to a long process of enquiring that now comes to an end on the scene.

1110	σὴν	'of which you're talking about', cf. Bruhn Anhang §80

1116	δέρκομαι	leaving the parenthetical ὡς ἔοικε aside, the sentence can be punctuated and constructed in 2 ways: 1. no punctuation marks between τοῦτ᾽ ἐκεῖν᾽ ἤδη σαφὲς πρόχειρον ἄχθος [...] δέρκομαι: 'There, it seems, I clearly see that sorrow (=the sorrow which I foreboded) in your hands' (Jebb), with σαφές as adverbial and the accumulation of demonstrative pronouns (thus Dawe) 2. punctuation marks after both ἐκεῖνο and σαφές: 'that it is, it is now clear; I see the burden near at hand' (Kam, Ll-J&W, Finglass). N.1 is annotated here, which is coherent with the punctuation of our text

1117	κλαίεις	transitive: LSJ II, who quotes A. Ag. 890

1126	μνημεῖον	the noun phrase is constructed according to Jebb's interpretation, φιλτάτου with μνημεῖον, λοιπόν governing ψυχῆς which governs Ὀρέστου in its turn; see Pattoni's it. translation: "o ricordo del più caro a me fra gli uomini, ultimo avanzo della vita di Oreste".

1128	οὐχ	if sounds, makes a very bold syntax, blending two different ideas: 1. ὥς σ᾽εἰσεδεξάμην ἀπ᾽ ἐλπίδων  ἃς εἶχον ἡνίκ' ἐξέπεμπόν σε 2. ὥς σ᾽ εἰσεδεξάμην οὐ ταῖς αὐταῖς ἐλπίσιν ἃς εἶχον ἡνίκ' ἐξέπεμπόν σε. Finglass preferes Wecklein's ὑφ'. But the boldness of this combination might very well be Sophoclean

1128	ὧνπερ	if οὐχ is retained (see above), then it should be considered a case of attraction, = αἷς












